1 
 
USDA Agricultural Research Service  
Scientific Collections Management and Access Policy 
September 2014 
 
Beginning in 2005, the White House's Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) and Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB) included in its priorities for interagency activity a call to "focus 
attention on integrated support and planning for the care and use of federally held scientific 
collections."  This call gave rise to the formation of an Interagency Working Group on Scientific 
Collections (IWGSC) under the Committee of Science of the National Science and Technology Council 
(NSTC).  The IWGSC issued a report entitled, “Scientific Collections: Mission-Critical Infrastructure 
for Federal Science Agencies,” in December 2008 that made recommendations for the improvement of 
management, accessibility and impact of scientific collections owned by U.S. government departments 
and agencies.  
On October 6, 2010, OSTP issued a memorandum to the heads of executive departments and agencies 
entitled, “Policy on Scientific Collections,” that directed IWGSC to develop plans for: i) budgeting for 
collections, ii) ensuring best management practices for collections, and iii) making collections more 
accessible.   
On March 20, 2014, OSTP issued a memorandum to the heads of executive departments and agencies 
entitled, “Improving the Management of and Access to Scientific Collections.”  In the memorandum, 
OSTP directed federal agencies that own, maintain or otherwise financially support permanent 
scientific collections to develop a scientific collections management and access policy. 
The following document is a response to the 2014 memorandum.  It summarizes the management and 
access policies for institutional scientific collections owned, maintained, or otherwise financially 
supported by the Agricultural Research
Text Len: 1858
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Collections.”  In the memorandum, 
OSTP directed federal agencies that own, maintain or otherwise financially support permanent 
scientific collections to develop a scientific collections management and access policy. 
The following document is a response to the 2014 memorandum.  It summarizes the management and 
access policies for institutional scientific collections owned, maintained, or otherwise financially 
supported by the Agricultural Research Service (ARS), an agency of the United States Department of 
Agriculture.  These policy requirements were developed with input from NSTC and IWGSC to also 
comply with the policy memorandum on scientific collections issued by OSTP in 2010 and the America 
COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010.   
 
ARS SCIENTIFIC COLLECTIONS PHILOSOPHY 
 
This document focuses on institutional collections.  The ARS policy is that all scientific objects that 
make up in part or in whole an ARS scientific collection are publicly funded assets and great care and 
caution should be taken in regards to their care and preservation.  As with real and personal property, 
ARS must exercise reasonable oversight over the inventory and control of scientific objects.  These 
assets are resources obtained and/or produced for the purposes of supporting ARS research and should 
therefore have been obtained and/or produced as part of an ARS staff member's official duties.  As 
such, barring restrictions of national and/or personal security, these objects are considered publicly 
owned and are generally in the public domain.  ARS regards all scientific objects with the same 
appreciation as permanent records of research (for example, a laboratory notebook) or government 
property.  Scientific collections are a national and international resource.  These objects do not belong 
to the scientist; instead, for research or institutional collections, the scientist or curator should inform 
M
Text Len: 1931
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and are generally in the public domain.  ARS regards all scientific objects with the same 
appreciation as permanent records of research (for example, a laboratory notebook) or government 
property.  Scientific collections are a national and international resource.  These objects do not belong 
to the scientist; instead, for research or institutional collections, the scientist or curator should inform 
MMS of any major proposed change in acquisition, care, transfer, or de-acquisition/disposal of the 
collection.  While it is not expected that an exhaustible resource asset such as culture specimens 
collected during an experiment are in effect a permanent collection, it is the policy of ARS that 
specimens that have achieved reference status as a long-term voucher or that are shared among 
laboratories for purposes of research must be given consideration as part of a potential institutional 
2 
 
collection which deserves long-term care.  Note: If specimens or cultures are used to support research 
findings, especially in a new publication or technical report, then researchers should deposit 
representative specimens or cultures on which that research is based in an appropriate ARS institutional 
or other permanent collection that has the assigned responsibility for long-term maintenance of such 
essential reference materials.  This depends on resources and the availability of an appropriate 
collection.  
 
Each institutional collection is an integral part of an ARS project that is peer-reviewed every five years 
and is subject to fiscal management planning through the Annual Resources Management Plan 
(ARMP) process.  Thus, no institutional collection exists independently of ARS research and a 
Congressional appropriation for research.   
 
DEFINITIONS 
 
SCIENTIFIC COLLECTION 
 
For the purposes of this document, scientific collections are broadly defined as sets of physical objects, 
Text Len: 1920
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 planning through the Annual Resources Management Plan 
(ARMP) process.  Thus, no institutional collection exists independently of ARS research and a 
Congressional appropriation for research.   
 
DEFINITIONS 
 
SCIENTIFIC COLLECTION 
 
For the purposes of this document, scientific collections are broadly defined as sets of physical objects, 
living or inanimate, and their supporting records and documentation, which are used in science and 
resource management and serve as long-term research assets that are preserved, cataloged, and 
managed by or supported by federal agencies for research, resource management, education, and other 
uses.  These collections are created for the purpose of supporting or doing science or providing 
germplasm, rather than for their market value as collectibles or their historical, artistic, cultural, or 
other significance.  The focus is on institutional collections.  The focus is not on specimens, or parts of 
specimens used temporarily, that document individual-based observations (e.g., individuals alive or 
dead from an ecological census wherein data pertaining to each individual is not captured in the study – 
although, permanently accessioned taxon vouchers are always a recommended practice), or that are 
considered an exhaustible resource (e.g., a biotic reagent as part of a protocol).  However, since all 
project or working research collections were obtained through public funding, are federal assets, and 
may be candidates for designation as institutional collections for long-term preservation, they must be 
cared for by means appropriate as a federal asset.  The following criteria differentiate institutional from 
project collections.  Each institutional collection is: 
 
 Subject to a formal accessioning process, including associated documentation and archival 
material (e.g., notes, photographs and maps); 
Text Len: 1880
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 as institutional collections for long-term preservation, they must be 
cared for by means appropriate as a federal asset.  The following criteria differentiate institutional from 
project collections.  Each institutional collection is: 
 
 Subject to a formal accessioning process, including associated documentation and archival 
material (e.g., notes, photographs and maps); 
 Under the authority of scientific collection curators or scientists and housed in facilities devoted 
to long-term collection storage;  
 Inventory validated on a schedule determined by the Agency to ensure accountability of the 
collection; 
 Physically labeled in some way with catalog numbers or other unique identifiers linked to a 
corresponding record in a database or other record-keeping system;  
 Routinely made available to all qualified users, with certain exceptions; 
 Made available to qualified parties through formal loan procedures for research, education, or 
exhibition; 
 Preserved long-term, except under certain infrequent conditions which may justify de-
accessioning under a set of formal de-accessioning procedures. 
3 
 
SPECIMEN METADATA 
Specimen metadata is information that describes a specimen that is part of a scientific collection. 
Generally, metadata make a specimen uniquely identifiable and more easily searchable.  Specimen 
metadata also often provide important scientific information about the specimen that may have its own 
research or education value.  Examples of specimen metadata include: 
 Source specific information (i.e., date of isolation, source, etc.); 
 Phenotypic and genotypic scientific information (i.e., toxin producer, serotype, or sequence 
type);  
 Species identification;  
�
Text Len: 1731
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
research or education value.  Examples of specimen metadata include: 
 Source specific information (i.e., date of isolation, source, etc.); 
 Phenotypic and genotypic scientific information (i.e., toxin producer, serotype, or sequence 
type);  
 Species identification;  
 Digital images of macroscopic specimens or cultures of microscopic specimens. 
RECORDS AND REGISTRIES 
The following are suggested ways to document records.  Each institutional collection curator or 
working collection researcher will need to document collections appropriate to their intended use.    
 SPECIMEN RECORD 
 A specimen record is composed of all metadata for a single specimen in a scientific 
collection.  
SCIENTIFIC COLLECTION DATABASE 
 A scientific collection database is a listing or database of all records associated with 
collection activity including specimens, taxa, accessions, transfers, loans, borrows, 
inventory, physical location, collection manager(s), and other relevant information. 
 SCIENTIFIC COLLECTION RECORD 
 A record of a scientific collection, or a scientific collection record, is a descriptive guide to a 
scientific collection.  
 The record contains essential information such as the title of the scientific collection, 
contact information, and the physical location of the specimens.  Each scientific collection 
record is made available to the public via an online registry and points to the location of the 
associated scientific collection database. 
SCIENTIFIC COLLECTION REGISTRY 
 A scientific collection registry is defined as an online digital repository that stores and 
makes publicly available the scientific collection records and, as appropriate, the scientific 
collections database associated with that record.
Text Len: 1757
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 is made available to the public via an online registry and points to the location of the 
associated scientific collection database. 
SCIENTIFIC COLLECTION REGISTRY 
 A scientific collection registry is defined as an online digital repository that stores and 
makes publicly available the scientific collection records and, as appropriate, the scientific 
collections database associated with that record.  The Smithsonian Institution has identified 
GRSciColl (http://www.GRSciColl.org) as an appropriate federal scientific collection 
registry.  And the Agency has chosen to adopt GRSciColl as its scientific collections registry 
to host scientific collection records, with the option to store scientific collection databases. 
  
PURPOSE AND SCOPE 
 
ARS conducts research to develop and transfer solutions to agricultural problems of high national 
priority and provide information access and dissemination to: 
 ensure high-quality, safe food, and other agricultural products; 
4 
 
 assess the nutritional needs of Americans; 
 sustain a competitive agricultural economy; 
 enhance the natural resource base and the environment; and, 
 provide economic opportunities for rural citizens, communities, and society as a whole. 
 
ARS collections are essential to the mission of the Agency.  Every day, ARS scientists at locations 
across the Nation and the World, make use of collections to support their research.  The value of this 
activity is evident.  In the Agency’s 61-year history, collections have contributed to a number of 
groundbreaking discoveries and have had a significant societal impact. 
 The ARS Culture Collection (NRRL) in Peoria, Illinois, exemplifies this success.  With cultures 
from this collection, USDA scientists undertook research that led to the commercial
Text Len: 1800
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

activity is evident.  In the Agency’s 61-year history, collections have contributed to a number of 
groundbreaking discoveries and have had a significant societal impact. 
 The ARS Culture Collection (NRRL) in Peoria, Illinois, exemplifies this success.  With cultures 
from this collection, USDA scientists undertook research that led to the commercial 
development of the antibiotic penicillin, which heralded a revolution in the treatment of 
illnesses and disease, and contributed, in part, to the Allied success in World War II. 
 Peoria also commercialized riboflavin (Vitamin B2), dextran and xanthan gum, and developed 
several databases of gene sequences that allow rapid identification of fungal and bacterial 
species.  The databases are used worldwide to greatly enhance plant food safety and medical 
research.  These remarkable accomplishments showed the breadth of the collection’s impact on 
science and society, and were made possible in part because the fungal and bacterial collections 
were so well maintained.  In addition, this collection facilitates technological innovation by 
enabling scientists to simultaneously fulfill microbial culture deposition requirements in 
association with patent applications in the United States and any of the 77 other countries that 
are contracting parties of the Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of the Deposit of 
Microorganisms for the Purposes of Patent Procedures, signed on April 28, 1977.     
 The USDA Nematode Collection (USDANC) in Beltsville, Maryland, has contributed to the 
ARS mission in several ways.  For example, in 1970, nematode pests threatened the billion-
dollar potato economy of the Pacific Northwest.  After comparisons of pest specimens with 
archived specimens at USDANC, scientists determined that the source of the problem was a 
Text Len: 1839
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The USDA Nematode Collection (USDANC) in Beltsville, Maryland, has contributed to the 
ARS mission in several ways.  For example, in 1970, nematode pests threatened the billion-
dollar potato economy of the Pacific Northwest.  After comparisons of pest specimens with 
archived specimens at USDANC, scientists determined that the source of the problem was a 
new nematode species and were able to make recommendations about crop rotations to save the 
industry.  Similarly, in 2000, ARS scientists persuaded Brazilian officials to lift a ban on wheat 
imports by showing that U.S. wheat exports were free of a quarantined nematode.  This saved 
the wheat industry millions of dollars, and was made possible with the use of ARS’ thorough 
and well-preserved collection of nematodes. 
 The scope of ARS collections extends beyond the Agency.  A number of current collections 
predate the formation of ARS, and many are used by scientists around the globe.  The National 
Plant Germplasm System (NPGS), for example, is one of the largest distributors of plant 
germplasm in the world.  NPGS conserves more than 472,000 accessions and annually 
distributes approximately 120,000 of these to external researchers.  NPGS furnishes the raw 
material for crop improvement worldwide, thereby helping to underpin global food security.  
NPGS’ germplasm collection contributes tremendously to scientific research efforts and 
provides a valuable service to the scientific community. 
 ARS’s U.S. Small Grains Collection in Aberdeen, Idaho has been critical to finding an answer 
to Ug99, which is threatening the world’s barley and wheat.  Researchers and breeders
Text Len: 1656
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
NPGS’ germplasm collection contributes tremendously to scientific research efforts and 
provides a valuable service to the scientific community. 
 ARS’s U.S. Small Grains Collection in Aberdeen, Idaho has been critical to finding an answer 
to Ug99, which is threatening the world’s barley and wheat.  Researchers and breeders in ARS 
and from around the world have been screening the collection for genes to provide new sources 
of stem rust resistance to what is considered by many experts to be the most serious threat to the 
world’s wheat in the past 50 years. 
 
It is clear that collections, particularly the Agency’s large, institutional collections, play a critical role in 
supporting both ARS research as well as research conducted by other institutions in North America and 
5 
 
around the world.  However, if a collection is not appropriately maintained, significant losses can 
occur, lowering its value to research.   
 
ARS shares the objectives of transparency and maximizing public access to ARS scientific collections, 
where feasible and appropriate.  Accordingly, this document establishes policy, responsibilities, and 
procedures for the management of and access to scientific collections to protect these National 
resources. 
This policy applies to all current and future institutional scientific collections that the Agency owns or 
manages.   
 
LEGISLATIVE AND REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS AND AUTHORITIES  
 
ARS is the USDA’s chief in-house research agency comprising a workforce of approximately 6,000 
employees including 2,100 scientists and post doctoral associates representing a wide range of 
disciplines.  ARS has 800 research projects at 90+ locations, including overseas laboratories.  The U.S 
Congress first authorized
Text Len: 1757
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MENTS AND AUTHORITIES  
 
ARS is the USDA’s chief in-house research agency comprising a workforce of approximately 6,000 
employees including 2,100 scientists and post doctoral associates representing a wide range of 
disciplines.  ARS has 800 research projects at 90+ locations, including overseas laboratories.  The U.S 
Congress first authorized federally-supported agricultural research in the Department of Agriculture 
Organic Act of 1862 (7 U.S.C. 2201), establishing what is now the USDA.  That statute directed the 
Commissioner of Agriculture "... to acquire and preserve in his Department all information he can 
obtain by means of books and correspondence, and by practical and scientific experiments..."  ARS 
refers to this statute in ensuring protection of all of its scientific collections. 
 
Additionally, ARS maintains the National Plant Germplasm System (NPGS), a network of federal plant 
genebanks, which operates under authority derived from, inter alia, 7 U.S.C. 2201, 2204, 3125a, 3291, 
5841 and 5924.  
In 1990, the U.S. Congress passed legislation (P.L. 101-624) that authorized establishment of a 
National Genetic Resources Program (NGRP) to acquire, characterize, preserve, document, and 
distribute germplasm of all life forms (i.e., plant, animal,  microbial, insect, and aquatic species) 
important for food and agricultural production.   ARS was assigned the primary role of coordinating 
and administering the NGRP.  In addition, the 1990 legislation directed establishment of a National 
Genetic Resources Advisory Committee (NGRAC) to respond to the important issues of the nation 
related to conserving and utilizing genetic resources for food and
Text Len: 1686
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, and aquatic species) 
important for food and agricultural production.   ARS was assigned the primary role of coordinating 
and administering the NGRP.  In addition, the 1990 legislation directed establishment of a National 
Genetic Resources Advisory Committee (NGRAC) to respond to the important issues of the nation 
related to conserving and utilizing genetic resources for food and agriculture.   
At Peoria, ARS has an additional authority (7 USC 7641), as part of the 1985 Farm Bill, to administer a 
program of fees for the deposit and distribution of microbial patent cultures in support of international 
treaties.  This authority is in support of the Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of the 
Deposit of Microorganisms for the Purposes of Patent Procedures, signed on April 28, 1977.  
 
Note:  REE P&P 601.2-ARS Transfer of Biological Agents and Related Information to Non-
USDA Locations or Individuals 
 
Additional authorities include: 
 
 Agricultural Research Act of 1935 (7 U.S.C. 427) 
 Research and Marketing Act of 1946 (Pub. L. 79-733), as amend ed (7 U.S.C. 427, 1621 
note) 
 Food and Agriculture Act of 1977 (Pub. L. 95-113), as amend ed (7 U.S.C. 1281 note) 
6 
 
 Food Security Act of 1985 (Pub. L. 99-198) (7 U.S.C. 3101 note) 
 Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and Trad e Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-624) (7 U.S.C. 1421 
note) 
 Fed eral Agriculture
Text Len: 1397
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Food Security Act of 1985 (Pub. L. 99-198) (7 U.S.C. 3101 note) 
 Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and Trad e Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-624) (7 U.S.C. 1421 
note) 
 Fed eral Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act of 1996 (Pub. L. 104-127) 
 Agriculture Research, Extension, and Education Reform Act of 1998 (Pub. L. 105-185) 
 Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 (Pub. L. 107-171) 
 Purposes of Agricultural Research, Extension, and Education (Pub. L. 104-127, Titl e VIII, 
Sec. 901, Apr. 4, 1996, 110 Stat. 1156) 
 Freed om of Information Act (5 U.S.C 552) 
 Privacy Act (5 U.S.C. 552a) 
 Trad e Secrets Act (18 U.S.C. 1905) 
 Copyright Act (17 U.S.C. 101 inter alia) 
 Fed eral Acquisition Regulations System, Solicitation Provisions and Contract Clauses (48 
C.F.R. Part 52) 
 Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board (FASAB) (FASAB, 2005) 
 Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA) of 1993 (P.L. 103-62) 
 Executive Order 12862 of 1993 on Customer Service Standards 
 America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010 (Pub. L. No. 111-358), Section 104 
requires the OSTP
Text Len: 1106
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AB, 2005) 
 Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA) of 1993 (P.L. 103-62) 
 Executive Order 12862 of 1993 on Customer Service Standards 
 America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010 (Pub. L. No. 111-358), Section 104 
requires the OSTP Director to “d evel op policies for the management and use of fed eral 
scientific coll ections to improve the quality, organization, access, including online access, 
and l ong-term preservation of such coll ections for the benefit of the scientific enterprise.”  
 Office of Science and Technol ogy Policy, Memorandum for the Head s of Executive 
Departments and Agencies, Policy on Scientific coll ections (October 6, 2010) 
 Office of Science and Technol ogy Policy, Memorandum for the Head s of Executive 
Departments and Agencies, Improving the Management of and Access to Scientific 
Coll ections (March 20, 2014) 
 
RESPONSIBILITIES: ORGANIZATIONAL COMPONENTS AND AGENCY 
OFFICIALS THAT SUPPORT AND IMPLEMENT COLLECTIONS POLICY IN 
ARS  
 
ARS is a research-based agency, so all scientific collections are utilized to support research, collaborate 
with the research community worldwide, and to archive and preserve scientific objects crucial to the 
support of the current and future research community.  All of the research projects, and therefore the 
collections that support those research projects, are aligned into 17 National Programs grouped into 
four program areas: Animal Production and Protection; Crop Production and Protection; Natural 
Resources and Sustainable Agricultural Systems; and, Nutrition, Food Safety, and Quality.  Each of the 
Text Len: 1611
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
support of the current and future research community.  All of the research projects, and therefore the 
collections that support those research projects, are aligned into 17 National Programs grouped into 
four program areas: Animal Production and Protection; Crop Production and Protection; Natural 
Resources and Sustainable Agricultural Systems; and, Nutrition, Food Safety, and Quality.  Each of the 
four program areas is managed by a Deputy Administrator, and each program is led by a team of 
National Program Leaders (NPLs).  Currently, about 20 NPLs are responsible for planning and 
7 
 
developing research strategies to address critical issues affecting American agriculture.  Collectively, 
this forms the Office of National Programs (ONP). 
 
ARS leadership formulated the present concept of ONP as a result of a desire to update the Agency’s 
approach to interdisciplinary, nationally collaborative research in order to remain on the leading edge 
of agricultural research.  In 1993, two federal policy and regulatory requirements provided increased 
impetus for this development: the Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA), requiring all 
federal institutions to be accountable to Congress and U.S. taxpayers, and an Executive Order to 
increase customer service standards.  The Agricultural Research, Extension, and Education Reform Act 
of 1998 demanded further accountability, mandating the establishment of procedures to perform 
scientific peer reviews of all research projects conducted by ARS.  
 
To plan, implement, coordinate, and account for its research, ARS utilizes its Matrix Management 
System (MMS).  MMS is composed of vertical (line) management organized by geographic Areas, 
horizontal (staff) management organized by research programs (ONP), and also includes other 
functions (budgeting, information technology, technology transfer, security), and business processes
Text Len: 1914
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 plan, implement, coordinate, and account for its research, ARS utilizes its Matrix Management 
System (MMS).  MMS is composed of vertical (line) management organized by geographic Areas, 
horizontal (staff) management organized by research programs (ONP), and also includes other 
functions (budgeting, information technology, technology transfer, security), and business processes 
(administrative and financial management).  The role of ONP in MMS is to provide program direction, 
relevance, and coordination.  The role of line management is to manage project resources and assure 
project research quality.  The Administrator and the executive leadership team (Administrator‘s 
Council) of ARS provide leadership to MMS in accordance with the ARS Strategic Plan, National 
Program Actions Plans, and established operating policies. 
 
ONP coordinates a 5-year program management cycle that includes the activities by which ARS 
conducts its research, ensuring effective and efficient program and project management.  In order to be 
successful, programs and projects must meet goals in three areas: Relevance, Quality (Prospective and 
Retrospective), and Performance.  In order to demonstrate that ARS research is of the highest quality 
and to meet the requirements of the Government Performance and Review Act, the Agency prescribes 
five actions: Program Planning and Priority Setting, Scientific Merit Peer Review [including an outside 
peer panel review organized by the Office of Scientific Quality Review (OSQR)], Project 
Implementation, Project Coordination, and Program Assessment.  Since ARS scientific collections 
support research programs, they are included as an integral part of the 5-year program planning cycle.  
This includes scientific collections that support ongoing or newly proposed research programs or 
projects.  The planning and management of all scientific collections whether extant or
Text Len: 1922
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 (OSQR)], Project 
Implementation, Project Coordination, and Program Assessment.  Since ARS scientific collections 
support research programs, they are included as an integral part of the 5-year program planning cycle.  
This includes scientific collections that support ongoing or newly proposed research programs or 
projects.  The planning and management of all scientific collections whether extant or proposed must 
be considered during all phases of the development, management, and assessment of the 5-year 
program cycle and ultimate authority and accountability for ARS scientific collections is determined 
via MMS.  MMS is responsible for implementing this policy on scientific collections across all ARS 
research programs.  All decisions as to the maintenance, accessioning, and de-accessioning of ARS 
scientific collections should be considered a modification of a research program and therefore under the 
guidance of MMS.  For institutional collections, curators have authority to make such decisions; 
however, major decisions on accessioning, care, and de-accessioning of entire collections or major 
subsets of collections are brought to the attention of the appropriate Area Office leadership and ONP, 
including the ARS Scientific Collections Committee (ASCC). 
 
SPECIFIC ROLES REGARDING COLLECTIONS 
 
AREA OFFICES 
 ARS Area Directors are responsible for the management of funds, personnel, and facilities 
available for the Agency’s scientific research, including associated collections, in a specific 
8 
 
multi-state Area.  Research Leaders (or other representatives designated by each Area 
Director) have responsibility for direct oversight of collection management in Research 
Units.   
OFFICE OF NATIONAL PROGRAMS 
 The Associate Administrator for the Office of National Programs and ASCC, with
Text Len: 1830
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, including associated collections, in a specific 
8 
 
multi-state Area.  Research Leaders (or other representatives designated by each Area 
Director) have responsibility for direct oversight of collection management in Research 
Units.   
OFFICE OF NATIONAL PROGRAMS 
 The Associate Administrator for the Office of National Programs and ASCC, with Deputy 
Administrators and National Program Leaders, and with feedback from project scientists 
and stakeholders, evaluates present and future ARS scientific collections activity needed to 
support research projects.   
ARS SCIENTIFIC COLLECTIONS COMMITTEE (ASCC) 
 The Associate Administrator for the Office of National Programs chairs and appoints the 
members of the ARS Scientific Collections Committee to determine whether a collection 
meets the criteria specified (page 2) for an institutional collection, provide technical subject 
matter expertise on best practices, and develop recommendations for actions by Agency 
leadership to ensure the quality and sustainability of collections as critical components of 
scientific infrastructure.  ASCC has representation from ONP and curators and scientists 
responsible for collections.  The committee convenes as needed, at least once per year.     
SCIENTISTS    
 
 Scientists are responsible for knowing and following best practices and standards for 
specimen-based documentation of their primary research findings and maintaining   
specimens or parts of specimens in a manner that would support their potential long-term 
transfer into and curation in an institutional collection.  Some may fulfill a role as a 
collection curator. 
 
COLLECTION CURATORS 
 
 Institutional collections will have a scientific collection curator, often a project Lead 
Scientist, who is responsible for: 
o Direction and planning of the
Text Len: 1832
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 their potential long-term 
transfer into and curation in an institutional collection.  Some may fulfill a role as a 
collection curator. 
 
COLLECTION CURATORS 
 
 Institutional collections will have a scientific collection curator, often a project Lead 
Scientist, who is responsible for: 
o Direction and planning of the scientific collection; 
o Establishment of interagency agreements or contracts, if necessary; 
o Establishment, review, submission, and revision of a Scientific Collection Plan, 
including standard operating protocols (SOPs); 
o Establishment of collecting priorities to guide the development of collections; 
o Control, monitoring, and documentation of all access to and use of collections; 
o Ensuring that the SOPs are stored in designated, accessible but secure locations and 
available to personnel at all times; 
o Ensuring that personnel review the SOPs, and associated trainings are recorded; 
o Compliance with this policy, SOPs, and the Scientific Collection Plan, and annual 
reporting on compliance; 
o Delegation of authority and assignment of collection responsibility to the appropriate 
project staff; and, 
9 
 
o General scientific collection management and reporting. 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES 
RESEARCH PROJECT PLAN  
ARS recognizes that the scientists accumulating scientific objects are best suited to propose plans for 
long-term preservation, maintenance, and accessibility of all scientific collections. 
Planning for an institutional collection is done as part of developing a research Project Plan during the 
typical 5-year project cycle, including external peer review coordinated by OSQR.  Project Plans and 
their objectives are developed by ONP in collaboration with curators and other scientists.  These plans 
also receive input from line management. 
The
Text Len: 1815
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 scientific collections. 
Planning for an institutional collection is done as part of developing a research Project Plan during the 
typical 5-year project cycle, including external peer review coordinated by OSQR.  Project Plans and 
their objectives are developed by ONP in collaboration with curators and other scientists.  These plans 
also receive input from line management. 
The scientific collections plan section of the Project Plan provides an overall vision and protocols for 
the creation, expansion, long-term management, disposal, and accessibility and security of the scientific 
collection.  The collections section of a research Project Plan includes the following topics:  
 Accessioning Plan 
 Maintenance Plan 
 De-accessioning Plan (if needed)  
 Access Plan  
For some collections, extensive procedures have been established.  For example, since 1996 the 
National Plant Germplasm System (NPGS) has followed the NPGS Manual of Procedures, which is 
currently undergoing revision.  Individual genebanks are also required to develop and adhere to their 
own genebank-specific Manual of Procedures, tailored to the biological characteristics of the crops that 
they manage and the needs of the user communities they serve.   
 
Accessioning Plan 
ARS acquires specimens by a variety of methods, including transfer and field collecting.  The Agency 
recommends responsible, disciplined acquisition of collections, and the specimens within, through the 
following principles:  
 The acquisition of collections should be relevant to the mission and goals of ARS and individual 
laboratories; 
 There should be clear delegation of collecting authority within laboratories to avoid duplication 
of efforts and mishandling; and, 
 There should be strict adherence to all applicable laws and regulations
Text Len: 1822
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 the 
following principles:  
 The acquisition of collections should be relevant to the mission and goals of ARS and individual 
laboratories; 
 There should be clear delegation of collecting authority within laboratories to avoid duplication 
of efforts and mishandling; and, 
 There should be strict adherence to all applicable laws and regulations relating to collections 
acquisition. 
As a general rule, collection items are acquired and accessioned only when there is a good faith 
intention to retain them in ARS permanently or for the long-term.  Institutional scientific collections are 
retained as long as they continue to serve the mission and objectives of the Agency, and can be properly 
maintained and used. 
Accession Plans provide the following information: 
1. Scope of specimens to be potentially included into an institutional collection 
2. The estimated yearly growth of the scientific collection 
10 
 
3. Accessioning Protocols 
a. For transfer of custody of a specimen into the scientific collection 
b. Procedures used to process, handle, and store the specimen 
c. For the timely accession of the specimen: 
a. Standardized descriptive metadata into the record, including, but not limited to: 
1. Accession/voucher number 
2. Physical location 
3. Accession date 
4. Strain or species information 
b. Insertion of the record into the database/catalog 
d. Assignment of physical storage space to the specimen 
4. Maintenance, Budget, and Access Plans 
 
Maintenance Plan 
Each Maintenance Plan should have the following information: 
 
1. General information 
 a. Name, contact information, and operational division for the scientific collection curator 
 b. Purpose of institutional scientific collection 
Text Len: 1736
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 database/catalog 
d. Assignment of physical storage space to the specimen 
4. Maintenance, Budget, and Access Plans 
 
Maintenance Plan 
Each Maintenance Plan should have the following information: 
 
1. General information 
 a. Name, contact information, and operational division for the scientific collection curator 
 b. Purpose of institutional scientific collection 
 c. Date scientific collection was or will be established 
d. Any applicable statute, regulations, or policy that must be observed during the accession 
and management of specimens 
e.  Standards for consistent documentation of metadata 
f.  Infrastructure requirements 
g.  Data management plan (machine-readable, open format) 
2.  Maintenance Protocols 
a. Procedures used to process, handle, maintain, track, ship, and share specimens 
b. Procedures used to store specimens in facilities devoted to long-term collection storage, 
including best practices for the long-term storage of institutional scientific collections 
c. Procedures used to inventory the collection to ensure accountability of the collection 
d. Procedures used to physically label specimens in some way with catalog numbers or other 
unique identifiers linked to the corresponding record in the institutional scientific collection 
database  
e. A document to control program and policies for modifying or revising the SOP 
 
De-Accessioning Plan 
11 
 
Prudent institutional scientific collection management includes judicious consideration of appropriate 
de-accessioning and disposal.  The periodic review, evaluation, de-accessioning, and disposal of 
existing institutional scientific collections is intended to refine and improve the quality and relevance of 
collections with respect to ARS’s mission and purpose.  
De-accessioning and disposal occur for a variety of reasons, such as unneeded duplication or 
redund
Text Len: 1870
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ing and disposal.  The periodic review, evaluation, de-accessioning, and disposal of 
existing institutional scientific collections is intended to refine and improve the quality and relevance of 
collections with respect to ARS’s mission and purpose.  
De-accessioning and disposal occur for a variety of reasons, such as unneeded duplication or 
redundancy of institutional scientific collection material; an insufficient relationship of collection items 
to the mission and goals of ARS such that they are judged to be better placed elsewhere; and, use in 
research that destroys the future use of the specimens.  
A lasting archive of ARS research and the data, datasets, and voucher specimen objects that supported 
the research should be preserved indefinitely as resources allow.  The decision to de-accession a 
specimen should be made only after careful review of the research, resource management, and 
educational value of a collection.  Specimen objects and their associated data that form in part or in 
whole an ARS scientific collection must go through review by MMS before de-accession, transfer, or 
disposal.  Consideration is given to how research objectives will be met in the absence of the scientific 
collection, the impact of the unfulfilled objectives of the National Research Program if not met, the 
financial consequences relating to the loss of the specimens, including potential costs of reacquisition, 
recollecting, or reproducing the specimen objects in the future, the loss of any potential ARS research 
products that could be generated from the specimen objects, and the impact on ARS staff and 
stakeholders at large as a result of reducing or losing access to the specimen objects either temporarily 
or permanently.  For project and institutional collections proposed for de-accession by a laboratory 
scientist or curator, MMS and
Text Len: 1869
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, the loss of any potential ARS research 
products that could be generated from the specimen objects, and the impact on ARS staff and 
stakeholders at large as a result of reducing or losing access to the specimen objects either temporarily 
or permanently.  For project and institutional collections proposed for de-accession by a laboratory 
scientist or curator, MMS and ASCC is responsible for making sure that other (non-owner) ARS 
laboratories will be given an opportunity to accept ownership of the collection, except as otherwise 
stipulated by authorizing legislation or other restrictions.  If, after the review process, ARS determines 
that the specimen objects forming a scientific collection in part or in whole will not be further 
supported in any ARS National Research Program, then the priority is to seek another federal 
institution as a depository.  Scientific collection curators should consult with researchers who have used 
the collection, parties interested in the collection’s value for research, resource management, and 
educational purposes, and other subject matter experts, as needed.  A public or private institution may 
become the depository if a federal institution is unavailable.  Permanent destruction of specimen 
objects that have supported ARS research is the last option after pursuing all other options. 
Note:  REE P&P 601.2-ARS Transfer of Biological Agents and Related Information to Non-USDA 
Locations or Individuals. 
 
Collections, or specimens within, may be de-accessioned and destroyed only in accordance with 
established authority of the designated scientific collection curator and only when consistent with 
applicable law. 
 
Notification, Review and Approval 
A notification of de-accessioning of an entire institutional scientific collection is submitted 
through the management chain of command, starting with the Research
Text Len: 1884
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 or specimens within, may be de-accessioned and destroyed only in accordance with 
established authority of the designated scientific collection curator and only when consistent with 
applicable law. 
 
Notification, Review and Approval 
A notification of de-accessioning of an entire institutional scientific collection is submitted 
through the management chain of command, starting with the Research Leader (RL).  Once the 
RL approves the plan, it then proceeds via MMS to ASCC for notification.  The Associate 
Administrator of ONP will also notify the Administrative Council about the impending de-
accessioning of an institutional scientific collection. 
De-accessioning Plans should include: 
1. A notice of scientific collection de-accessioning must contain the following information: 
12 
 
a. Scientific collection curator and contact information 
b. Itemized list of specimens to be de-accessioned 
c. The disposition of the collection (e.g., transferred or destroyed) 
d. Transfer recipient, if applicable 
e. De-accessioning date 
f. Date of transfer or destruction 
2. A final notification must be sent to the Associate Administrator of ONP once the entire 
institutional scientific collection has been either transferred or destroyed. 
3. De-accessioning and Disposal Protocol, including: 
a. Guidelines for the decision to de-accession a specimen 
b. A procedure for the orderly transfer of specimens to a new collection 
c. The proper method of disposal of the specimen(s) 
Access and Use Plan 
Specimens within an ARS scientific collection are the property of the United States Government.  ARS 
will provide reasonable physical access to its institutional scientific collections to qualified researchers, 
academics, and others as feasible, appropriate, and consistent with Agency
Text Len: 1800
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 to a new collection 
c. The proper method of disposal of the specimen(s) 
Access and Use Plan 
Specimens within an ARS scientific collection are the property of the United States Government.  ARS 
will provide reasonable physical access to its institutional scientific collections to qualified researchers, 
academics, and others as feasible, appropriate, and consistent with Agency mission and pursuant to the 
scientific collections SOP.  Those seeking physical access to the institutional scientific collection must 
adhere to the procedures outlined in the collection’s SOP. 
Physical and digital access to the collections must be balanced against human resources, preservation, 
and security concerns.  Scientific collection curators, working with MMS and in consultation with their 
Research Leader and ONP, will have the discretion to temporarily, or permanently, limit the access to 
institutional scientific collections and related catalogs, databases, records, and metadata for purposes 
of: 
 Safeguarding individual privacy, confidentiality, trade secrets, copyright, and intellectual 
property rights; 
 Adhering to laws, regulations, treaties, and international or tribal agreements; 
 Protecting national security; 
 Resource limitations; 
 Specimen availability; 
 Preservation constraints; or,  
 Addressing general security concerns. 
Any limits to public access to the institutional scientific collection must be disclosed in the SCP, 
including: 
 Restrictions, and justification, for physical access to the scientific collection; and, 
 Redactions, and justification, for the digital access to the scientific collection. 
Scientific collection databases, which include all specimen records and metadata, are made available to 
the public through GRSciColl (http://www.GRSciColl
Text Len: 1808
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
including: 
 Restrictions, and justification, for physical access to the scientific collection; and, 
 Redactions, and justification, for the digital access to the scientific collection. 
Scientific collection databases, which include all specimen records and metadata, are made available to 
the public through GRSciColl (http://www.GRSciColl.org).  A collection curator may also choose to 
13 
 
separately provide public access to the scientific collection database online through an ARS website, 
provided the scientific collection record in GRSciColl directs users to the location of the online 
database.  
For more than 20 years, extensive information about the USDA/ARS’s plant, animal, and microbial 
genetic resources conserved by its genebanks have been maintained and are publicly accessible online 
via the Germplasm Resources Information Network (GRIN) at http://www.ars-grin.gov.    
With few exceptions (e.g., patent or Plant Variety Protection vouchers), the accessions in the NPGS and 
other ARS genebanks and associated information are in the public domain.  Information about the 
original location where accessions of rare and/or endangered taxa were collected are not accessible to 
GRIN users.  Curators can make that information available to researchers with legitimate needs for 
those data. 
 
USDA is home to long term public databases for plant genetic and genomic information.  A few USDA 
databases are dedicated to specific crops, e.g. SoyBase (soybean), MaizeGDB (corn), GrainGenes 
(wheat, barley, and oats).  Others host genetic/genomic information for diverse, non-redundant families 
of plants, e.g. Legume Information System
Text Len: 1663
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and genomic information.  A few USDA 
databases are dedicated to specific crops, e.g. SoyBase (soybean), MaizeGDB (corn), GrainGenes 
(wheat, barley, and oats).  Others host genetic/genomic information for diverse, non-redundant families 
of plants, e.g. Legume Information System (LIS) and Gramene.  The project plans for each database are 
kept current in consultation with representatives from each research community. 
 
All restrictions on digital access shall be limited to the minimal subset of specific records and metadata 
as possible, with all other collection content made public.  Where possible, redaction of specific 
metadata should be favored over limiting digital and physical access to the entire specimen or subset of 
specimens.  
Metadata format 
When constructing and formatting the institutional scientific collection metadata, scientific 
collection curators must employ machine-readable and open formats, data standards, and 
common-core and extensible metadata for all new information creation and collection to 
facilitate search and discoverability and provide clear public guidance for accessing collections 
materials, consistent with the Executive Order on Making Open and Machine Readable the New 
Default for Government Information. 
When available and where not limited by law, this policy, or resources, ARS will make freely 
and easily accessible to the public all digital metadata in the highest available fidelity and 
resolution, including, but not limited to photographs, videos, and associated records and 
documentation, that describe or characterize specimens in a scientific collection. 
Third-Party Management of Institutional Scientific Collections 
Third-party collections are those not owned, but supported, by ARS.  For example, ARS partially funds 
the Tomato Genetic Stock Center at the University of California at Davis and the Ornamental Plant
Text Len: 1898
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 to photographs, videos, and associated records and 
documentation, that describe or characterize specimens in a scientific collection. 
Third-Party Management of Institutional Scientific Collections 
Third-party collections are those not owned, but supported, by ARS.  For example, ARS partially funds 
the Tomato Genetic Stock Center at the University of California at Davis and the Ornamental Plant 
Germplasm Center at The Ohio State University, and their accessions have NPGS numbers, 
information in GRIN, and are backed-up in the ARS genebank at Ft. Collins.  Thus, these collections 
follow the same guidelines as the ARS genebanks. 
To start a new third-party collection and, whenever practicable and appropriate, a scientific collection 
curator should work with public or private outside entities qualified to manage scientific collections.  
Those entities must agree to take responsibility for the stewardship and access to institutional scientific 
collections.  
14 
 
 If the outside entity is a federal agency, then the entity’s scientific collection’s policy applies to 
the institutional collection.  An interagency agreement should be executed and included with a 
scientific collections plan (if available) and annual report. 
 If the outside entity is not a federal agency, and does not have a relevant scientific collections 
management and access policy, then the institutional scientific collection will be governed by 
the ARS policy.  All Agency grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements that direct an outside 
non-federal entity to obtain or create an institutional collection must require the entity to 
comply with the ARS scientific collections policy.  The agreement or contract should be 
included with the scientific collection section of the annual report. 
Access Plans include Access and Use Protocols: 
1. Detailed
Text Len: 1859
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements that direct an outside 
non-federal entity to obtain or create an institutional collection must require the entity to 
comply with the ARS scientific collections policy.  The agreement or contract should be 
included with the scientific collection section of the annual report. 
Access Plans include Access and Use Protocols: 
1. Detailed instructions for digital access to the scientific collection, including: 
a. Step by step instructions and timelines for the process of providing digital public access 
to newly accessioned specimens  
b. A detailed description of which records or specimen metadata fields are restricted from 
disclosure and why 
c. A timeline from accession of a specimen to digital public access 
d. A detailed description of which records and metadata to be redacted 
2. Detailed instructions for physical access to the scientific collection, including: 
a. Outline procedures to properly aliquot, or parse, bio-specimens to ensure ease of 
distribution 
b. A detailed description of which specimens, records, and metadata will not be available 
for physical access 
c. Procedures used to respond to and accommodate physical access and loan requests 
d. A standard timeline to respond to a request 
BUDGETING 
An institutional collection is part of an ARS base-funded project subject to OSQR review, thus, the 
collection’s budget is part of the overall project budget.  Project budgets and their adequacy to support 
the research, including relevant institutional collections, are subject to yearly review by line 
management in the Agency’s ARMP process.    
ANNUAL REPORTING 
To maintain proper oversight of the management of institutional scientific collections, the scientific 
collection curator submits an annual report summarizing the status of the collection as a component of 

Text Len: 1860
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
acy to support 
the research, including relevant institutional collections, are subject to yearly review by line 
management in the Agency’s ARMP process.    
ANNUAL REPORTING 
To maintain proper oversight of the management of institutional scientific collections, the scientific 
collection curator submits an annual report summarizing the status of the collection as a component of 
the project annual report.  The project annual report is reviewed and approved by the Research Leader 
of the Management Unit where the institutional collection resides.  Subsequent approval by line 
management and review by program leaders are required per standard ARS policies and procedures for 
project annual reports.  The annual report for a project including an institutional collection must 
include: 
 A link to the catalog in GRSciColl (http://www.GRSciColl.org) 
 A summary of major changes to the digital or physical public access to the scientific collection; 
15 
 
 The current interagency agreement, memorandum of understanding, or contract with a third 
party entity responsible with the management of the scientific collection, if applicable; 
 A summary of any significant changes in practices, procedures, technology, law, or regulation 
that impact the collection.  
PRACTICES FOR SAFEGUARDING INDIVIDUAL PRIV ACY, 
CONFIDENTIALITY, INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS, AND 
NATIONAL SECURITY  
 
PRIV ACY/CONFIDENTIALITY 
 
In most cases, materials are broadly distributed from ARS collections without privacy or confidentiality 
restrictions.  Nevertheless, certain circumstances require protection of confidential information.  
Confidentiality Agreements (CA) can be put into place to protect this information.  A CA permits 
Text Len: 1733
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
URITY  
 
PRIV ACY/CONFIDENTIALITY 
 
In most cases, materials are broadly distributed from ARS collections without privacy or confidentiality 
restrictions.  Nevertheless, certain circumstances require protection of confidential information.  
Confidentiality Agreements (CA) can be put into place to protect this information.  A CA permits 
parties to exchange confidential information and data.  The signatories of a CA agree to not disclose 
information received from the other party.  A Material Transfer Agreement (MTA) is a type of 
confidentiality agreement that governs the transfer of certain kinds of materials between two 
organizations.  The MTA does not transfer ownership – the materials are merely lent to the receiving 
organization and the MTA sets forth the conditions of the loan by defining the rights of the provider 
and recipient with respect to the materials and any derivatives, as well as the purposes to which the 
material may be put.  
 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY  
 
Outcomes of ARS research may require some form of intellectual property (IP) protection in order to 
attract the investment required to achieve successful utilization or adoption of scientific materials.  
Most protection of intellectual property in the Federal Government is done through patents.  The first 
consideration in deciding whether or not to seek a patent is if protection will enhance the likelihood 
that the scientific materials will be utilized or adopted.   
 
BIOSAFETY AND BIOSECURITY 
 
To ensure safety and environmental protection, ARS employees are required to comply with all federal, 
state, and local regulations regarding the movement of pathogens (human, animal, and plant) within or 
into the United States, and safeguarding of those pathogens.  Pathogens are distributed and transported 
only
Text Len: 1816
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
BIOSAFETY AND BIOSECURITY 
 
To ensure safety and environmental protection, ARS employees are required to comply with all federal, 
state, and local regulations regarding the movement of pathogens (human, animal, and plant) within or 
into the United States, and safeguarding of those pathogens.  Pathogens are distributed and transported 
only under authority of a permit (e.g., from the USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, the 
Department of Health and Human Services, or the Department of Commerce, as appropriate) and a 
Material Transfer Agreement.  Permitting agencies specify the level of containment for the pathogen as 
well as conditions for limiting access to pathogens and final disposal methods for pathogens.  
Acceptable disposal methods (usually autoclaving) for pathogens received under permit are specified in 
the permit.  This is out of concern for protecting the Agency from liabilities as well as protecting the 
end-user/requestor from potential harm/infection/contamination/etc.  Inventories of pathogens present 
in ARS are maintained by ARS.  
 
Note:  REE P&P 601.2-ARS Transfer of Biological Agents and Related Information to Non-
USDA Locations or Individuals 
 
Text Len: 1206
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1 
 
USDA Agricultural Research Service  
Scientific Collections Management and Access Policy 
September 2014 
 
Beginning in 2005, the White House's Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) and Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB) included in its priorities for interagency activity a call to "focus 
attention on integrated support and planning for the care and use of federally held scientific 
collections."  This call gave rise to the formation of an Interagency Working Group on Scientific 
Collections (IWGSC) under the Committee of Science of the National Science and Technology Council 
(NSTC).  The IWGSC issued a report entitled, “Scientific Collections: Mission-Critical Infrastructure 
for Federal Science Agencies,” in December 2008 that made recommendations for the improvement of 
management, accessibility and impact of scientific collections owned by U.S. government departments 
and agencies.  
On October 6, 2010, OSTP issued a memorandum to the heads of executive departments and agencies 
entitled, “Policy on Scientific Collections,” that directed IWGSC to develop plans for: i) budgeting for 
collections, ii) ensuring best management practices for collections, and iii) making collections more 
accessible.   
On March 20, 2014, OSTP issued a memorandum to the heads of executive departments and agencies 
entitled, “Improving the Management of and Access to Scientific Collections.”  In the memorandum, 
OSTP directed federal agencies that own, maintain or otherwise financially support permanent 
scientific collections to develop a scientific collections management and access policy. 
The following document is a response to the 2014 memorandum.  It summarizes the management and 
access policies for institutional scientific collections owned, maintained, or otherwise financially 
supported by the Agricultural Research
Text Len: 1858
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Collections.”  In the memorandum, 
OSTP directed federal agencies that own, maintain or otherwise financially support permanent 
scientific collections to develop a scientific collections management and access policy. 
The following document is a response to the 2014 memorandum.  It summarizes the management and 
access policies for institutional scientific collections owned, maintained, or otherwise financially 
supported by the Agricultural Research Service (ARS), an agency of the United States Department of 
Agriculture.  These policy requirements were developed with input from NSTC and IWGSC to also 
comply with the policy memorandum on scientific collections issued by OSTP in 2010 and the America 
COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010.   
 
ARS SCIENTIFIC COLLECTIONS PHILOSOPHY 
 
This document focuses on institutional collections.  The ARS policy is that all scientific objects that 
make up in part or in whole an ARS scientific collection are publicly funded assets and great care and 
caution should be taken in regards to their care and preservation.  As with real and personal property, 
ARS must exercise reasonable oversight over the inventory and control of scientific objects.  These 
assets are resources obtained and/or produced for the purposes of supporting ARS research and should 
therefore have been obtained and/or produced as part of an ARS staff member's official duties.  As 
such, barring restrictions of national and/or personal security, these objects are considered publicly 
owned and are generally in the public domain.  ARS regards all scientific objects with the same 
appreciation as permanent records of research (for example, a laboratory notebook) or government 
property.  Scientific collections are a national and international resource.  These objects do not belong 
to the scientist; instead, for research or institutional collections, the scientist or curator should inform 
M
Text Len: 1931
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and are generally in the public domain.  ARS regards all scientific objects with the same 
appreciation as permanent records of research (for example, a laboratory notebook) or government 
property.  Scientific collections are a national and international resource.  These objects do not belong 
to the scientist; instead, for research or institutional collections, the scientist or curator should inform 
MMS of any major proposed change in acquisition, care, transfer, or de-acquisition/disposal of the 
collection.  While it is not expected that an exhaustible resource asset such as culture specimens 
collected during an experiment are in effect a permanent collection, it is the policy of ARS that 
specimens that have achieved reference status as a long-term voucher or that are shared among 
laboratories for purposes of research must be given consideration as part of a potential institutional 
2 
 
collection which deserves long-term care.  Note: If specimens or cultures are used to support research 
findings, especially in a new publication or technical report, then researchers should deposit 
representative specimens or cultures on which that research is based in an appropriate ARS institutional 
or other permanent collection that has the assigned responsibility for long-term maintenance of such 
essential reference materials.  This depends on resources and the availability of an appropriate 
collection.  
 
Each institutional collection is an integral part of an ARS project that is peer-reviewed every five years 
and is subject to fiscal management planning through the Annual Resources Management Plan 
(ARMP) process.  Thus, no institutional collection exists independently of ARS research and a 
Congressional appropriation for research.   
 
DEFINITIONS 
 
SCIENTIFIC COLLECTION 
 
For the purposes of this document, scientific collections are broadly defined as sets of physical objects, 
Text Len: 1920
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 planning through the Annual Resources Management Plan 
(ARMP) process.  Thus, no institutional collection exists independently of ARS research and a 
Congressional appropriation for research.   
 
DEFINITIONS 
 
SCIENTIFIC COLLECTION 
 
For the purposes of this document, scientific collections are broadly defined as sets of physical objects, 
living or inanimate, and their supporting records and documentation, which are used in science and 
resource management and serve as long-term research assets that are preserved, cataloged, and 
managed by or supported by federal agencies for research, resource management, education, and other 
uses.  These collections are created for the purpose of supporting or doing science or providing 
germplasm, rather than for their market value as collectibles or their historical, artistic, cultural, or 
other significance.  The focus is on institutional collections.  The focus is not on specimens, or parts of 
specimens used temporarily, that document individual-based observations (e.g., individuals alive or 
dead from an ecological census wherein data pertaining to each individual is not captured in the study – 
although, permanently accessioned taxon vouchers are always a recommended practice), or that are 
considered an exhaustible resource (e.g., a biotic reagent as part of a protocol).  However, since all 
project or working research collections were obtained through public funding, are federal assets, and 
may be candidates for designation as institutional collections for long-term preservation, they must be 
cared for by means appropriate as a federal asset.  The following criteria differentiate institutional from 
project collections.  Each institutional collection is: 
 
 Subject to a formal accessioning process, including associated documentation and archival 
material (e.g., notes, photographs and maps); 
Text Len: 1880
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 as institutional collections for long-term preservation, they must be 
cared for by means appropriate as a federal asset.  The following criteria differentiate institutional from 
project collections.  Each institutional collection is: 
 
 Subject to a formal accessioning process, including associated documentation and archival 
material (e.g., notes, photographs and maps); 
 Under the authority of scientific collection curators or scientists and housed in facilities devoted 
to long-term collection storage;  
 Inventory validated on a schedule determined by the Agency to ensure accountability of the 
collection; 
 Physically labeled in some way with catalog numbers or other unique identifiers linked to a 
corresponding record in a database or other record-keeping system;  
 Routinely made available to all qualified users, with certain exceptions; 
 Made available to qualified parties through formal loan procedures for research, education, or 
exhibition; 
 Preserved long-term, except under certain infrequent conditions which may justify de-
accessioning under a set of formal de-accessioning procedures. 
3 
 
SPECIMEN METADATA 
Specimen metadata is information that describes a specimen that is part of a scientific collection. 
Generally, metadata make a specimen uniquely identifiable and more easily searchable.  Specimen 
metadata also often provide important scientific information about the specimen that may have its own 
research or education value.  Examples of specimen metadata include: 
 Source specific information (i.e., date of isolation, source, etc.); 
 Phenotypic and genotypic scientific information (i.e., toxin producer, serotype, or sequence 
type);  
 Species identification;  
�
Text Len: 1731
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
research or education value.  Examples of specimen metadata include: 
 Source specific information (i.e., date of isolation, source, etc.); 
 Phenotypic and genotypic scientific information (i.e., toxin producer, serotype, or sequence 
type);  
 Species identification;  
 Digital images of macroscopic specimens or cultures of microscopic specimens. 
RECORDS AND REGISTRIES 
The following are suggested ways to document records.  Each institutional collection curator or 
working collection researcher will need to document collections appropriate to their intended use.    
 SPECIMEN RECORD 
 A specimen record is composed of all metadata for a single specimen in a scientific 
collection.  
SCIENTIFIC COLLECTION DATABASE 
 A scientific collection database is a listing or database of all records associated with 
collection activity including specimens, taxa, accessions, transfers, loans, borrows, 
inventory, physical location, collection manager(s), and other relevant information. 
 SCIENTIFIC COLLECTION RECORD 
 A record of a scientific collection, or a scientific collection record, is a descriptive guide to a 
scientific collection.  
 The record contains essential information such as the title of the scientific collection, 
contact information, and the physical location of the specimens.  Each scientific collection 
record is made available to the public via an online registry and points to the location of the 
associated scientific collection database. 
SCIENTIFIC COLLECTION REGISTRY 
 A scientific collection registry is defined as an online digital repository that stores and 
makes publicly available the scientific collection records and, as appropriate, the scientific 
collections database associated with that record.
Text Len: 1757
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 is made available to the public via an online registry and points to the location of the 
associated scientific collection database. 
SCIENTIFIC COLLECTION REGISTRY 
 A scientific collection registry is defined as an online digital repository that stores and 
makes publicly available the scientific collection records and, as appropriate, the scientific 
collections database associated with that record.  The Smithsonian Institution has identified 
GRSciColl (http://www.GRSciColl.org) as an appropriate federal scientific collection 
registry.  And the Agency has chosen to adopt GRSciColl as its scientific collections registry 
to host scientific collection records, with the option to store scientific collection databases. 
  
PURPOSE AND SCOPE 
 
ARS conducts research to develop and transfer solutions to agricultural problems of high national 
priority and provide information access and dissemination to: 
 ensure high-quality, safe food, and other agricultural products; 
4 
 
 assess the nutritional needs of Americans; 
 sustain a competitive agricultural economy; 
 enhance the natural resource base and the environment; and, 
 provide economic opportunities for rural citizens, communities, and society as a whole. 
 
ARS collections are essential to the mission of the Agency.  Every day, ARS scientists at locations 
across the Nation and the World, make use of collections to support their research.  The value of this 
activity is evident.  In the Agency’s 61-year history, collections have contributed to a number of 
groundbreaking discoveries and have had a significant societal impact. 
 The ARS Culture Collection (NRRL) in Peoria, Illinois, exemplifies this success.  With cultures 
from this collection, USDA scientists undertook research that led to the commercial
Text Len: 1800
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

activity is evident.  In the Agency’s 61-year history, collections have contributed to a number of 
groundbreaking discoveries and have had a significant societal impact. 
 The ARS Culture Collection (NRRL) in Peoria, Illinois, exemplifies this success.  With cultures 
from this collection, USDA scientists undertook research that led to the commercial 
development of the antibiotic penicillin, which heralded a revolution in the treatment of 
illnesses and disease, and contributed, in part, to the Allied success in World War II. 
 Peoria also commercialized riboflavin (Vitamin B2), dextran and xanthan gum, and developed 
several databases of gene sequences that allow rapid identification of fungal and bacterial 
species.  The databases are used worldwide to greatly enhance plant food safety and medical 
research.  These remarkable accomplishments showed the breadth of the collection’s impact on 
science and society, and were made possible in part because the fungal and bacterial collections 
were so well maintained.  In addition, this collection facilitates technological innovation by 
enabling scientists to simultaneously fulfill microbial culture deposition requirements in 
association with patent applications in the United States and any of the 77 other countries that 
are contracting parties of the Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of the Deposit of 
Microorganisms for the Purposes of Patent Procedures, signed on April 28, 1977.     
 The USDA Nematode Collection (USDANC) in Beltsville, Maryland, has contributed to the 
ARS mission in several ways.  For example, in 1970, nematode pests threatened the billion-
dollar potato economy of the Pacific Northwest.  After comparisons of pest specimens with 
archived specimens at USDANC, scientists determined that the source of the problem was a 
Text Len: 1839
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The USDA Nematode Collection (USDANC) in Beltsville, Maryland, has contributed to the 
ARS mission in several ways.  For example, in 1970, nematode pests threatened the billion-
dollar potato economy of the Pacific Northwest.  After comparisons of pest specimens with 
archived specimens at USDANC, scientists determined that the source of the problem was a 
new nematode species and were able to make recommendations about crop rotations to save the 
industry.  Similarly, in 2000, ARS scientists persuaded Brazilian officials to lift a ban on wheat 
imports by showing that U.S. wheat exports were free of a quarantined nematode.  This saved 
the wheat industry millions of dollars, and was made possible with the use of ARS’ thorough 
and well-preserved collection of nematodes. 
 The scope of ARS collections extends beyond the Agency.  A number of current collections 
predate the formation of ARS, and many are used by scientists around the globe.  The National 
Plant Germplasm System (NPGS), for example, is one of the largest distributors of plant 
germplasm in the world.  NPGS conserves more than 472,000 accessions and annually 
distributes approximately 120,000 of these to external researchers.  NPGS furnishes the raw 
material for crop improvement worldwide, thereby helping to underpin global food security.  
NPGS’ germplasm collection contributes tremendously to scientific research efforts and 
provides a valuable service to the scientific community. 
 ARS’s U.S. Small Grains Collection in Aberdeen, Idaho has been critical to finding an answer 
to Ug99, which is threatening the world’s barley and wheat.  Researchers and breeders
Text Len: 1656
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
NPGS’ germplasm collection contributes tremendously to scientific research efforts and 
provides a valuable service to the scientific community. 
 ARS’s U.S. Small Grains Collection in Aberdeen, Idaho has been critical to finding an answer 
to Ug99, which is threatening the world’s barley and wheat.  Researchers and breeders in ARS 
and from around the world have been screening the collection for genes to provide new sources 
of stem rust resistance to what is considered by many experts to be the most serious threat to the 
world’s wheat in the past 50 years. 
 
It is clear that collections, particularly the Agency’s large, institutional collections, play a critical role in 
supporting both ARS research as well as research conducted by other institutions in North America and 
5 
 
around the world.  However, if a collection is not appropriately maintained, significant losses can 
occur, lowering its value to research.   
 
ARS shares the objectives of transparency and maximizing public access to ARS scientific collections, 
where feasible and appropriate.  Accordingly, this document establishes policy, responsibilities, and 
procedures for the management of and access to scientific collections to protect these National 
resources. 
This policy applies to all current and future institutional scientific collections that the Agency owns or 
manages.   
 
LEGISLATIVE AND REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS AND AUTHORITIES  
 
ARS is the USDA’s chief in-house research agency comprising a workforce of approximately 6,000 
employees including 2,100 scientists and post doctoral associates representing a wide range of 
disciplines.  ARS has 800 research projects at 90+ locations, including overseas laboratories.  The U.S 
Congress first authorized
Text Len: 1757
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MENTS AND AUTHORITIES  
 
ARS is the USDA’s chief in-house research agency comprising a workforce of approximately 6,000 
employees including 2,100 scientists and post doctoral associates representing a wide range of 
disciplines.  ARS has 800 research projects at 90+ locations, including overseas laboratories.  The U.S 
Congress first authorized federally-supported agricultural research in the Department of Agriculture 
Organic Act of 1862 (7 U.S.C. 2201), establishing what is now the USDA.  That statute directed the 
Commissioner of Agriculture "... to acquire and preserve in his Department all information he can 
obtain by means of books and correspondence, and by practical and scientific experiments..."  ARS 
refers to this statute in ensuring protection of all of its scientific collections. 
 
Additionally, ARS maintains the National Plant Germplasm System (NPGS), a network of federal plant 
genebanks, which operates under authority derived from, inter alia, 7 U.S.C. 2201, 2204, 3125a, 3291, 
5841 and 5924.  
In 1990, the U.S. Congress passed legislation (P.L. 101-624) that authorized establishment of a 
National Genetic Resources Program (NGRP) to acquire, characterize, preserve, document, and 
distribute germplasm of all life forms (i.e., plant, animal,  microbial, insect, and aquatic species) 
important for food and agricultural production.   ARS was assigned the primary role of coordinating 
and administering the NGRP.  In addition, the 1990 legislation directed establishment of a National 
Genetic Resources Advisory Committee (NGRAC) to respond to the important issues of the nation 
related to conserving and utilizing genetic resources for food and
Text Len: 1686
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, and aquatic species) 
important for food and agricultural production.   ARS was assigned the primary role of coordinating 
and administering the NGRP.  In addition, the 1990 legislation directed establishment of a National 
Genetic Resources Advisory Committee (NGRAC) to respond to the important issues of the nation 
related to conserving and utilizing genetic resources for food and agriculture.   
At Peoria, ARS has an additional authority (7 USC 7641), as part of the 1985 Farm Bill, to administer a 
program of fees for the deposit and distribution of microbial patent cultures in support of international 
treaties.  This authority is in support of the Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of the 
Deposit of Microorganisms for the Purposes of Patent Procedures, signed on April 28, 1977.  
 
Note:  REE P&P 601.2-ARS Transfer of Biological Agents and Related Information to Non-
USDA Locations or Individuals 
 
Additional authorities include: 
 
 Agricultural Research Act of 1935 (7 U.S.C. 427) 
 Research and Marketing Act of 1946 (Pub. L. 79-733), as amend ed (7 U.S.C. 427, 1621 
note) 
 Food and Agriculture Act of 1977 (Pub. L. 95-113), as amend ed (7 U.S.C. 1281 note) 
6 
 
 Food Security Act of 1985 (Pub. L. 99-198) (7 U.S.C. 3101 note) 
 Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and Trad e Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-624) (7 U.S.C. 1421 
note) 
 Fed eral Agriculture
Text Len: 1397
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Food Security Act of 1985 (Pub. L. 99-198) (7 U.S.C. 3101 note) 
 Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and Trad e Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-624) (7 U.S.C. 1421 
note) 
 Fed eral Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act of 1996 (Pub. L. 104-127) 
 Agriculture Research, Extension, and Education Reform Act of 1998 (Pub. L. 105-185) 
 Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 (Pub. L. 107-171) 
 Purposes of Agricultural Research, Extension, and Education (Pub. L. 104-127, Titl e VIII, 
Sec. 901, Apr. 4, 1996, 110 Stat. 1156) 
 Freed om of Information Act (5 U.S.C 552) 
 Privacy Act (5 U.S.C. 552a) 
 Trad e Secrets Act (18 U.S.C. 1905) 
 Copyright Act (17 U.S.C. 101 inter alia) 
 Fed eral Acquisition Regulations System, Solicitation Provisions and Contract Clauses (48 
C.F.R. Part 52) 
 Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board (FASAB) (FASAB, 2005) 
 Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA) of 1993 (P.L. 103-62) 
 Executive Order 12862 of 1993 on Customer Service Standards 
 America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010 (Pub. L. No. 111-358), Section 104 
requires the OSTP
Text Len: 1106
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AB, 2005) 
 Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA) of 1993 (P.L. 103-62) 
 Executive Order 12862 of 1993 on Customer Service Standards 
 America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010 (Pub. L. No. 111-358), Section 104 
requires the OSTP Director to “d evel op policies for the management and use of fed eral 
scientific coll ections to improve the quality, organization, access, including online access, 
and l ong-term preservation of such coll ections for the benefit of the scientific enterprise.”  
 Office of Science and Technol ogy Policy, Memorandum for the Head s of Executive 
Departments and Agencies, Policy on Scientific coll ections (October 6, 2010) 
 Office of Science and Technol ogy Policy, Memorandum for the Head s of Executive 
Departments and Agencies, Improving the Management of and Access to Scientific 
Coll ections (March 20, 2014) 
 
RESPONSIBILITIES: ORGANIZATIONAL COMPONENTS AND AGENCY 
OFFICIALS THAT SUPPORT AND IMPLEMENT COLLECTIONS POLICY IN 
ARS  
 
ARS is a research-based agency, so all scientific collections are utilized to support research, collaborate 
with the research community worldwide, and to archive and preserve scientific objects crucial to the 
support of the current and future research community.  All of the research projects, and therefore the 
collections that support those research projects, are aligned into 17 National Programs grouped into 
four program areas: Animal Production and Protection; Crop Production and Protection; Natural 
Resources and Sustainable Agricultural Systems; and, Nutrition, Food Safety, and Quality.  Each of the 
Text Len: 1611
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
support of the current and future research community.  All of the research projects, and therefore the 
collections that support those research projects, are aligned into 17 National Programs grouped into 
four program areas: Animal Production and Protection; Crop Production and Protection; Natural 
Resources and Sustainable Agricultural Systems; and, Nutrition, Food Safety, and Quality.  Each of the 
four program areas is managed by a Deputy Administrator, and each program is led by a team of 
National Program Leaders (NPLs).  Currently, about 20 NPLs are responsible for planning and 
7 
 
developing research strategies to address critical issues affecting American agriculture.  Collectively, 
this forms the Office of National Programs (ONP). 
 
ARS leadership formulated the present concept of ONP as a result of a desire to update the Agency’s 
approach to interdisciplinary, nationally collaborative research in order to remain on the leading edge 
of agricultural research.  In 1993, two federal policy and regulatory requirements provided increased 
impetus for this development: the Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA), requiring all 
federal institutions to be accountable to Congress and U.S. taxpayers, and an Executive Order to 
increase customer service standards.  The Agricultural Research, Extension, and Education Reform Act 
of 1998 demanded further accountability, mandating the establishment of procedures to perform 
scientific peer reviews of all research projects conducted by ARS.  
 
To plan, implement, coordinate, and account for its research, ARS utilizes its Matrix Management 
System (MMS).  MMS is composed of vertical (line) management organized by geographic Areas, 
horizontal (staff) management organized by research programs (ONP), and also includes other 
functions (budgeting, information technology, technology transfer, security), and business processes
Text Len: 1914
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 plan, implement, coordinate, and account for its research, ARS utilizes its Matrix Management 
System (MMS).  MMS is composed of vertical (line) management organized by geographic Areas, 
horizontal (staff) management organized by research programs (ONP), and also includes other 
functions (budgeting, information technology, technology transfer, security), and business processes 
(administrative and financial management).  The role of ONP in MMS is to provide program direction, 
relevance, and coordination.  The role of line management is to manage project resources and assure 
project research quality.  The Administrator and the executive leadership team (Administrator‘s 
Council) of ARS provide leadership to MMS in accordance with the ARS Strategic Plan, National 
Program Actions Plans, and established operating policies. 
 
ONP coordinates a 5-year program management cycle that includes the activities by which ARS 
conducts its research, ensuring effective and efficient program and project management.  In order to be 
successful, programs and projects must meet goals in three areas: Relevance, Quality (Prospective and 
Retrospective), and Performance.  In order to demonstrate that ARS research is of the highest quality 
and to meet the requirements of the Government Performance and Review Act, the Agency prescribes 
five actions: Program Planning and Priority Setting, Scientific Merit Peer Review [including an outside 
peer panel review organized by the Office of Scientific Quality Review (OSQR)], Project 
Implementation, Project Coordination, and Program Assessment.  Since ARS scientific collections 
support research programs, they are included as an integral part of the 5-year program planning cycle.  
This includes scientific collections that support ongoing or newly proposed research programs or 
projects.  The planning and management of all scientific collections whether extant or
Text Len: 1922
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 (OSQR)], Project 
Implementation, Project Coordination, and Program Assessment.  Since ARS scientific collections 
support research programs, they are included as an integral part of the 5-year program planning cycle.  
This includes scientific collections that support ongoing or newly proposed research programs or 
projects.  The planning and management of all scientific collections whether extant or proposed must 
be considered during all phases of the development, management, and assessment of the 5-year 
program cycle and ultimate authority and accountability for ARS scientific collections is determined 
via MMS.  MMS is responsible for implementing this policy on scientific collections across all ARS 
research programs.  All decisions as to the maintenance, accessioning, and de-accessioning of ARS 
scientific collections should be considered a modification of a research program and therefore under the 
guidance of MMS.  For institutional collections, curators have authority to make such decisions; 
however, major decisions on accessioning, care, and de-accessioning of entire collections or major 
subsets of collections are brought to the attention of the appropriate Area Office leadership and ONP, 
including the ARS Scientific Collections Committee (ASCC). 
 
SPECIFIC ROLES REGARDING COLLECTIONS 
 
AREA OFFICES 
 ARS Area Directors are responsible for the management of funds, personnel, and facilities 
available for the Agency’s scientific research, including associated collections, in a specific 
8 
 
multi-state Area.  Research Leaders (or other representatives designated by each Area 
Director) have responsibility for direct oversight of collection management in Research 
Units.   
OFFICE OF NATIONAL PROGRAMS 
 The Associate Administrator for the Office of National Programs and ASCC, with
Text Len: 1830
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, including associated collections, in a specific 
8 
 
multi-state Area.  Research Leaders (or other representatives designated by each Area 
Director) have responsibility for direct oversight of collection management in Research 
Units.   
OFFICE OF NATIONAL PROGRAMS 
 The Associate Administrator for the Office of National Programs and ASCC, with Deputy 
Administrators and National Program Leaders, and with feedback from project scientists 
and stakeholders, evaluates present and future ARS scientific collections activity needed to 
support research projects.   
ARS SCIENTIFIC COLLECTIONS COMMITTEE (ASCC) 
 The Associate Administrator for the Office of National Programs chairs and appoints the 
members of the ARS Scientific Collections Committee to determine whether a collection 
meets the criteria specified (page 2) for an institutional collection, provide technical subject 
matter expertise on best practices, and develop recommendations for actions by Agency 
leadership to ensure the quality and sustainability of collections as critical components of 
scientific infrastructure.  ASCC has representation from ONP and curators and scientists 
responsible for collections.  The committee convenes as needed, at least once per year.     
SCIENTISTS    
 
 Scientists are responsible for knowing and following best practices and standards for 
specimen-based documentation of their primary research findings and maintaining   
specimens or parts of specimens in a manner that would support their potential long-term 
transfer into and curation in an institutional collection.  Some may fulfill a role as a 
collection curator. 
 
COLLECTION CURATORS 
 
 Institutional collections will have a scientific collection curator, often a project Lead 
Scientist, who is responsible for: 
o Direction and planning of the
Text Len: 1832
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 their potential long-term 
transfer into and curation in an institutional collection.  Some may fulfill a role as a 
collection curator. 
 
COLLECTION CURATORS 
 
 Institutional collections will have a scientific collection curator, often a project Lead 
Scientist, who is responsible for: 
o Direction and planning of the scientific collection; 
o Establishment of interagency agreements or contracts, if necessary; 
o Establishment, review, submission, and revision of a Scientific Collection Plan, 
including standard operating protocols (SOPs); 
o Establishment of collecting priorities to guide the development of collections; 
o Control, monitoring, and documentation of all access to and use of collections; 
o Ensuring that the SOPs are stored in designated, accessible but secure locations and 
available to personnel at all times; 
o Ensuring that personnel review the SOPs, and associated trainings are recorded; 
o Compliance with this policy, SOPs, and the Scientific Collection Plan, and annual 
reporting on compliance; 
o Delegation of authority and assignment of collection responsibility to the appropriate 
project staff; and, 
9 
 
o General scientific collection management and reporting. 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES 
RESEARCH PROJECT PLAN  
ARS recognizes that the scientists accumulating scientific objects are best suited to propose plans for 
long-term preservation, maintenance, and accessibility of all scientific collections. 
Planning for an institutional collection is done as part of developing a research Project Plan during the 
typical 5-year project cycle, including external peer review coordinated by OSQR.  Project Plans and 
their objectives are developed by ONP in collaboration with curators and other scientists.  These plans 
also receive input from line management. 
The
Text Len: 1815
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 scientific collections. 
Planning for an institutional collection is done as part of developing a research Project Plan during the 
typical 5-year project cycle, including external peer review coordinated by OSQR.  Project Plans and 
their objectives are developed by ONP in collaboration with curators and other scientists.  These plans 
also receive input from line management. 
The scientific collections plan section of the Project Plan provides an overall vision and protocols for 
the creation, expansion, long-term management, disposal, and accessibility and security of the scientific 
collection.  The collections section of a research Project Plan includes the following topics:  
 Accessioning Plan 
 Maintenance Plan 
 De-accessioning Plan (if needed)  
 Access Plan  
For some collections, extensive procedures have been established.  For example, since 1996 the 
National Plant Germplasm System (NPGS) has followed the NPGS Manual of Procedures, which is 
currently undergoing revision.  Individual genebanks are also required to develop and adhere to their 
own genebank-specific Manual of Procedures, tailored to the biological characteristics of the crops that 
they manage and the needs of the user communities they serve.   
 
Accessioning Plan 
ARS acquires specimens by a variety of methods, including transfer and field collecting.  The Agency 
recommends responsible, disciplined acquisition of collections, and the specimens within, through the 
following principles:  
 The acquisition of collections should be relevant to the mission and goals of ARS and individual 
laboratories; 
 There should be clear delegation of collecting authority within laboratories to avoid duplication 
of efforts and mishandling; and, 
 There should be strict adherence to all applicable laws and regulations
Text Len: 1822
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 the 
following principles:  
 The acquisition of collections should be relevant to the mission and goals of ARS and individual 
laboratories; 
 There should be clear delegation of collecting authority within laboratories to avoid duplication 
of efforts and mishandling; and, 
 There should be strict adherence to all applicable laws and regulations relating to collections 
acquisition. 
As a general rule, collection items are acquired and accessioned only when there is a good faith 
intention to retain them in ARS permanently or for the long-term.  Institutional scientific collections are 
retained as long as they continue to serve the mission and objectives of the Agency, and can be properly 
maintained and used. 
Accession Plans provide the following information: 
1. Scope of specimens to be potentially included into an institutional collection 
2. The estimated yearly growth of the scientific collection 
10 
 
3. Accessioning Protocols 
a. For transfer of custody of a specimen into the scientific collection 
b. Procedures used to process, handle, and store the specimen 
c. For the timely accession of the specimen: 
a. Standardized descriptive metadata into the record, including, but not limited to: 
1. Accession/voucher number 
2. Physical location 
3. Accession date 
4. Strain or species information 
b. Insertion of the record into the database/catalog 
d. Assignment of physical storage space to the specimen 
4. Maintenance, Budget, and Access Plans 
 
Maintenance Plan 
Each Maintenance Plan should have the following information: 
 
1. General information 
 a. Name, contact information, and operational division for the scientific collection curator 
 b. Purpose of institutional scientific collection 
Text Len: 1736
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 database/catalog 
d. Assignment of physical storage space to the specimen 
4. Maintenance, Budget, and Access Plans 
 
Maintenance Plan 
Each Maintenance Plan should have the following information: 
 
1. General information 
 a. Name, contact information, and operational division for the scientific collection curator 
 b. Purpose of institutional scientific collection 
 c. Date scientific collection was or will be established 
d. Any applicable statute, regulations, or policy that must be observed during the accession 
and management of specimens 
e.  Standards for consistent documentation of metadata 
f.  Infrastructure requirements 
g.  Data management plan (machine-readable, open format) 
2.  Maintenance Protocols 
a. Procedures used to process, handle, maintain, track, ship, and share specimens 
b. Procedures used to store specimens in facilities devoted to long-term collection storage, 
including best practices for the long-term storage of institutional scientific collections 
c. Procedures used to inventory the collection to ensure accountability of the collection 
d. Procedures used to physically label specimens in some way with catalog numbers or other 
unique identifiers linked to the corresponding record in the institutional scientific collection 
database  
e. A document to control program and policies for modifying or revising the SOP 
 
De-Accessioning Plan 
11 
 
Prudent institutional scientific collection management includes judicious consideration of appropriate 
de-accessioning and disposal.  The periodic review, evaluation, de-accessioning, and disposal of 
existing institutional scientific collections is intended to refine and improve the quality and relevance of 
collections with respect to ARS’s mission and purpose.  
De-accessioning and disposal occur for a variety of reasons, such as unneeded duplication or 
redund
Text Len: 1870
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ing and disposal.  The periodic review, evaluation, de-accessioning, and disposal of 
existing institutional scientific collections is intended to refine and improve the quality and relevance of 
collections with respect to ARS’s mission and purpose.  
De-accessioning and disposal occur for a variety of reasons, such as unneeded duplication or 
redundancy of institutional scientific collection material; an insufficient relationship of collection items 
to the mission and goals of ARS such that they are judged to be better placed elsewhere; and, use in 
research that destroys the future use of the specimens.  
A lasting archive of ARS research and the data, datasets, and voucher specimen objects that supported 
the research should be preserved indefinitely as resources allow.  The decision to de-accession a 
specimen should be made only after careful review of the research, resource management, and 
educational value of a collection.  Specimen objects and their associated data that form in part or in 
whole an ARS scientific collection must go through review by MMS before de-accession, transfer, or 
disposal.  Consideration is given to how research objectives will be met in the absence of the scientific 
collection, the impact of the unfulfilled objectives of the National Research Program if not met, the 
financial consequences relating to the loss of the specimens, including potential costs of reacquisition, 
recollecting, or reproducing the specimen objects in the future, the loss of any potential ARS research 
products that could be generated from the specimen objects, and the impact on ARS staff and 
stakeholders at large as a result of reducing or losing access to the specimen objects either temporarily 
or permanently.  For project and institutional collections proposed for de-accession by a laboratory 
scientist or curator, MMS and
Text Len: 1869
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, the loss of any potential ARS research 
products that could be generated from the specimen objects, and the impact on ARS staff and 
stakeholders at large as a result of reducing or losing access to the specimen objects either temporarily 
or permanently.  For project and institutional collections proposed for de-accession by a laboratory 
scientist or curator, MMS and ASCC is responsible for making sure that other (non-owner) ARS 
laboratories will be given an opportunity to accept ownership of the collection, except as otherwise 
stipulated by authorizing legislation or other restrictions.  If, after the review process, ARS determines 
that the specimen objects forming a scientific collection in part or in whole will not be further 
supported in any ARS National Research Program, then the priority is to seek another federal 
institution as a depository.  Scientific collection curators should consult with researchers who have used 
the collection, parties interested in the collection’s value for research, resource management, and 
educational purposes, and other subject matter experts, as needed.  A public or private institution may 
become the depository if a federal institution is unavailable.  Permanent destruction of specimen 
objects that have supported ARS research is the last option after pursuing all other options. 
Note:  REE P&P 601.2-ARS Transfer of Biological Agents and Related Information to Non-USDA 
Locations or Individuals. 
 
Collections, or specimens within, may be de-accessioned and destroyed only in accordance with 
established authority of the designated scientific collection curator and only when consistent with 
applicable law. 
 
Notification, Review and Approval 
A notification of de-accessioning of an entire institutional scientific collection is submitted 
through the management chain of command, starting with the Research
Text Len: 1884
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 or specimens within, may be de-accessioned and destroyed only in accordance with 
established authority of the designated scientific collection curator and only when consistent with 
applicable law. 
 
Notification, Review and Approval 
A notification of de-accessioning of an entire institutional scientific collection is submitted 
through the management chain of command, starting with the Research Leader (RL).  Once the 
RL approves the plan, it then proceeds via MMS to ASCC for notification.  The Associate 
Administrator of ONP will also notify the Administrative Council about the impending de-
accessioning of an institutional scientific collection. 
De-accessioning Plans should include: 
1. A notice of scientific collection de-accessioning must contain the following information: 
12 
 
a. Scientific collection curator and contact information 
b. Itemized list of specimens to be de-accessioned 
c. The disposition of the collection (e.g., transferred or destroyed) 
d. Transfer recipient, if applicable 
e. De-accessioning date 
f. Date of transfer or destruction 
2. A final notification must be sent to the Associate Administrator of ONP once the entire 
institutional scientific collection has been either transferred or destroyed. 
3. De-accessioning and Disposal Protocol, including: 
a. Guidelines for the decision to de-accession a specimen 
b. A procedure for the orderly transfer of specimens to a new collection 
c. The proper method of disposal of the specimen(s) 
Access and Use Plan 
Specimens within an ARS scientific collection are the property of the United States Government.  ARS 
will provide reasonable physical access to its institutional scientific collections to qualified researchers, 
academics, and others as feasible, appropriate, and consistent with Agency
Text Len: 1800
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 to a new collection 
c. The proper method of disposal of the specimen(s) 
Access and Use Plan 
Specimens within an ARS scientific collection are the property of the United States Government.  ARS 
will provide reasonable physical access to its institutional scientific collections to qualified researchers, 
academics, and others as feasible, appropriate, and consistent with Agency mission and pursuant to the 
scientific collections SOP.  Those seeking physical access to the institutional scientific collection must 
adhere to the procedures outlined in the collection’s SOP. 
Physical and digital access to the collections must be balanced against human resources, preservation, 
and security concerns.  Scientific collection curators, working with MMS and in consultation with their 
Research Leader and ONP, will have the discretion to temporarily, or permanently, limit the access to 
institutional scientific collections and related catalogs, databases, records, and metadata for purposes 
of: 
 Safeguarding individual privacy, confidentiality, trade secrets, copyright, and intellectual 
property rights; 
 Adhering to laws, regulations, treaties, and international or tribal agreements; 
 Protecting national security; 
 Resource limitations; 
 Specimen availability; 
 Preservation constraints; or,  
 Addressing general security concerns. 
Any limits to public access to the institutional scientific collection must be disclosed in the SCP, 
including: 
 Restrictions, and justification, for physical access to the scientific collection; and, 
 Redactions, and justification, for the digital access to the scientific collection. 
Scientific collection databases, which include all specimen records and metadata, are made available to 
the public through GRSciColl (http://www.GRSciColl
Text Len: 1808
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
including: 
 Restrictions, and justification, for physical access to the scientific collection; and, 
 Redactions, and justification, for the digital access to the scientific collection. 
Scientific collection databases, which include all specimen records and metadata, are made available to 
the public through GRSciColl (http://www.GRSciColl.org).  A collection curator may also choose to 
13 
 
separately provide public access to the scientific collection database online through an ARS website, 
provided the scientific collection record in GRSciColl directs users to the location of the online 
database.  
For more than 20 years, extensive information about the USDA/ARS’s plant, animal, and microbial 
genetic resources conserved by its genebanks have been maintained and are publicly accessible online 
via the Germplasm Resources Information Network (GRIN) at http://www.ars-grin.gov.    
With few exceptions (e.g., patent or Plant Variety Protection vouchers), the accessions in the NPGS and 
other ARS genebanks and associated information are in the public domain.  Information about the 
original location where accessions of rare and/or endangered taxa were collected are not accessible to 
GRIN users.  Curators can make that information available to researchers with legitimate needs for 
those data. 
 
USDA is home to long term public databases for plant genetic and genomic information.  A few USDA 
databases are dedicated to specific crops, e.g. SoyBase (soybean), MaizeGDB (corn), GrainGenes 
(wheat, barley, and oats).  Others host genetic/genomic information for diverse, non-redundant families 
of plants, e.g. Legume Information System
Text Len: 1663
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and genomic information.  A few USDA 
databases are dedicated to specific crops, e.g. SoyBase (soybean), MaizeGDB (corn), GrainGenes 
(wheat, barley, and oats).  Others host genetic/genomic information for diverse, non-redundant families 
of plants, e.g. Legume Information System (LIS) and Gramene.  The project plans for each database are 
kept current in consultation with representatives from each research community. 
 
All restrictions on digital access shall be limited to the minimal subset of specific records and metadata 
as possible, with all other collection content made public.  Where possible, redaction of specific 
metadata should be favored over limiting digital and physical access to the entire specimen or subset of 
specimens.  
Metadata format 
When constructing and formatting the institutional scientific collection metadata, scientific 
collection curators must employ machine-readable and open formats, data standards, and 
common-core and extensible metadata for all new information creation and collection to 
facilitate search and discoverability and provide clear public guidance for accessing collections 
materials, consistent with the Executive Order on Making Open and Machine Readable the New 
Default for Government Information. 
When available and where not limited by law, this policy, or resources, ARS will make freely 
and easily accessible to the public all digital metadata in the highest available fidelity and 
resolution, including, but not limited to photographs, videos, and associated records and 
documentation, that describe or characterize specimens in a scientific collection. 
Third-Party Management of Institutional Scientific Collections 
Third-party collections are those not owned, but supported, by ARS.  For example, ARS partially funds 
the Tomato Genetic Stock Center at the University of California at Davis and the Ornamental Plant
Text Len: 1898
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 to photographs, videos, and associated records and 
documentation, that describe or characterize specimens in a scientific collection. 
Third-Party Management of Institutional Scientific Collections 
Third-party collections are those not owned, but supported, by ARS.  For example, ARS partially funds 
the Tomato Genetic Stock Center at the University of California at Davis and the Ornamental Plant 
Germplasm Center at The Ohio State University, and their accessions have NPGS numbers, 
information in GRIN, and are backed-up in the ARS genebank at Ft. Collins.  Thus, these collections 
follow the same guidelines as the ARS genebanks. 
To start a new third-party collection and, whenever practicable and appropriate, a scientific collection 
curator should work with public or private outside entities qualified to manage scientific collections.  
Those entities must agree to take responsibility for the stewardship and access to institutional scientific 
collections.  
14 
 
 If the outside entity is a federal agency, then the entity’s scientific collection’s policy applies to 
the institutional collection.  An interagency agreement should be executed and included with a 
scientific collections plan (if available) and annual report. 
 If the outside entity is not a federal agency, and does not have a relevant scientific collections 
management and access policy, then the institutional scientific collection will be governed by 
the ARS policy.  All Agency grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements that direct an outside 
non-federal entity to obtain or create an institutional collection must require the entity to 
comply with the ARS scientific collections policy.  The agreement or contract should be 
included with the scientific collection section of the annual report. 
Access Plans include Access and Use Protocols: 
1. Detailed
Text Len: 1859
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements that direct an outside 
non-federal entity to obtain or create an institutional collection must require the entity to 
comply with the ARS scientific collections policy.  The agreement or contract should be 
included with the scientific collection section of the annual report. 
Access Plans include Access and Use Protocols: 
1. Detailed instructions for digital access to the scientific collection, including: 
a. Step by step instructions and timelines for the process of providing digital public access 
to newly accessioned specimens  
b. A detailed description of which records or specimen metadata fields are restricted from 
disclosure and why 
c. A timeline from accession of a specimen to digital public access 
d. A detailed description of which records and metadata to be redacted 
2. Detailed instructions for physical access to the scientific collection, including: 
a. Outline procedures to properly aliquot, or parse, bio-specimens to ensure ease of 
distribution 
b. A detailed description of which specimens, records, and metadata will not be available 
for physical access 
c. Procedures used to respond to and accommodate physical access and loan requests 
d. A standard timeline to respond to a request 
BUDGETING 
An institutional collection is part of an ARS base-funded project subject to OSQR review, thus, the 
collection’s budget is part of the overall project budget.  Project budgets and their adequacy to support 
the research, including relevant institutional collections, are subject to yearly review by line 
management in the Agency’s ARMP process.    
ANNUAL REPORTING 
To maintain proper oversight of the management of institutional scientific collections, the scientific 
collection curator submits an annual report summarizing the status of the collection as a component of 

Text Len: 1860
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
acy to support 
the research, including relevant institutional collections, are subject to yearly review by line 
management in the Agency’s ARMP process.    
ANNUAL REPORTING 
To maintain proper oversight of the management of institutional scientific collections, the scientific 
collection curator submits an annual report summarizing the status of the collection as a component of 
the project annual report.  The project annual report is reviewed and approved by the Research Leader 
of the Management Unit where the institutional collection resides.  Subsequent approval by line 
management and review by program leaders are required per standard ARS policies and procedures for 
project annual reports.  The annual report for a project including an institutional collection must 
include: 
 A link to the catalog in GRSciColl (http://www.GRSciColl.org) 
 A summary of major changes to the digital or physical public access to the scientific collection; 
15 
 
 The current interagency agreement, memorandum of understanding, or contract with a third 
party entity responsible with the management of the scientific collection, if applicable; 
 A summary of any significant changes in practices, procedures, technology, law, or regulation 
that impact the collection.  
PRACTICES FOR SAFEGUARDING INDIVIDUAL PRIV ACY, 
CONFIDENTIALITY, INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS, AND 
NATIONAL SECURITY  
 
PRIV ACY/CONFIDENTIALITY 
 
In most cases, materials are broadly distributed from ARS collections without privacy or confidentiality 
restrictions.  Nevertheless, certain circumstances require protection of confidential information.  
Confidentiality Agreements (CA) can be put into place to protect this information.  A CA permits 
Text Len: 1733
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
URITY  
 
PRIV ACY/CONFIDENTIALITY 
 
In most cases, materials are broadly distributed from ARS collections without privacy or confidentiality 
restrictions.  Nevertheless, certain circumstances require protection of confidential information.  
Confidentiality Agreements (CA) can be put into place to protect this information.  A CA permits 
parties to exchange confidential information and data.  The signatories of a CA agree to not disclose 
information received from the other party.  A Material Transfer Agreement (MTA) is a type of 
confidentiality agreement that governs the transfer of certain kinds of materials between two 
organizations.  The MTA does not transfer ownership – the materials are merely lent to the receiving 
organization and the MTA sets forth the conditions of the loan by defining the rights of the provider 
and recipient with respect to the materials and any derivatives, as well as the purposes to which the 
material may be put.  
 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY  
 
Outcomes of ARS research may require some form of intellectual property (IP) protection in order to 
attract the investment required to achieve successful utilization or adoption of scientific materials.  
Most protection of intellectual property in the Federal Government is done through patents.  The first 
consideration in deciding whether or not to seek a patent is if protection will enhance the likelihood 
that the scientific materials will be utilized or adopted.   
 
BIOSAFETY AND BIOSECURITY 
 
To ensure safety and environmental protection, ARS employees are required to comply with all federal, 
state, and local regulations regarding the movement of pathogens (human, animal, and plant) within or 
into the United States, and safeguarding of those pathogens.  Pathogens are distributed and transported 
only
Text Len: 1816
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
BIOSAFETY AND BIOSECURITY 
 
To ensure safety and environmental protection, ARS employees are required to comply with all federal, 
state, and local regulations regarding the movement of pathogens (human, animal, and plant) within or 
into the United States, and safeguarding of those pathogens.  Pathogens are distributed and transported 
only under authority of a permit (e.g., from the USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, the 
Department of Health and Human Services, or the Department of Commerce, as appropriate) and a 
Material Transfer Agreement.  Permitting agencies specify the level of containment for the pathogen as 
well as conditions for limiting access to pathogens and final disposal methods for pathogens.  
Acceptable disposal methods (usually autoclaving) for pathogens received under permit are specified in 
the permit.  This is out of concern for protecting the Agency from liabilities as well as protecting the 
end-user/requestor from potential harm/infection/contamination/etc.  Inventories of pathogens present 
in ARS are maintained by ARS.  
 
Note:  REE P&P 601.2-ARS Transfer of Biological Agents and Related Information to Non-
USDA Locations or Individuals 
 
Text Len: 1206
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
