 
Study of Shedding and 
Venereal Transmission of 
Brucella abortus by Bison 
Bulls in the Greater 
Yellowstone Area 
 
 
Environmental Assessment 
February 2010 
 
 
 
Study of Shedding and 
Venereal Transmission of 
Brucella abortus by Bison 
Bulls in the Greater 
Yellowstone Area 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment 
February 2010 
 
 
 
 
Agency Contact: 
Dr. Brian McCluskey 
Director – Western Region 
Veterinary Services 
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
U.S. Department of Agriculture 
2150 Centre Avenue, Bldg B, Mailstop 3E13 
Fort Collins, CO  80526-8117 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________________________________________  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its 
programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, 
religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, or marital or family 
status.  (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.)  Persons with 
disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA’S 
TARGET Center at (202) 720–2600 (voice and TDD). 
 
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 
Room 326–W, Whitten Building, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, 
DC  20250–9410 or call (202) 720–5964 (voice and TDD).  USDA is an
Text Len: 1390
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
202) 720–2600 (voice and TDD). 
 
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 
Room 326–W, Whitten Building, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, 
DC  20250–9410 or call (202) 720–5964 (voice and TDD).  USDA is an equal 
opportunity provider and employer. 
 
Table of Contents 
 
  I.  Introduction ............................................................................... 1 
  A.  Ba ckground ......................................................................... 1 
  B.  Purpose of and N eed for the Proposed Action .................... 3 
 
 II.  Proposed Action and Alternatives ............................................. 4 
A.  No Action (the Current Situation) ........................................ 4 
B.  Proposed Action................................................................... 5 
C.  Other Possible Alternatives to Proposed Action .................. 7 
D. Other Alternatives Considered but Dismissed from  
 Further Consideration .......................................................... 7 
 
III.  Potential Environmental Impacts............................................... 7 
 A.  No Action ............................................................................. 8 
 B.  Propos ed Action .................................................................. 8 
1.  Animal Impacts................................................................ 8 
2.  Human Health and Safety ............................................. 10 
3.  Vegetation and Physical Environment........................... 11 
 
IV.  Other Environmental Review Requirements........................... 13 
A.  Endangered or Threatened Species .................................. 13 
B.  Bald Eagle and Golden Eagle Protection Act..................... 14 
C.  Historic and Cultural Resources......................................... 14 
 
V.  Cumulative Impacts ................................................................. 15 
 
 VI. Agencies or Persons Contacted ............................................. 16 
 
VII. 
Text Len: 2081
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A.  Endangered or Threatened Species .................................. 13 
B.  Bald Eagle and Golden Eagle Protection Act..................... 14 
C.  Historic and Cultural Resources......................................... 14 
 
V.  Cumulative Impacts ................................................................. 15 
 
 VI. Agencies or Persons Contacted ............................................. 16 
 
VII.  References ............................................................................ 16 
 
I. Introduction 
 
A. Background 
 
The wild, free-ranging bison in Yellowstone National Park (YNP) are an 
essential part of the biological, ecological, cultural, and aesthetic aspects 
of the Park.  Yellowstone bison are chronically infected with Brucella 
abortus, the causative agent of bovine brucellosis.  Studies estimate that 
between 40% to 60% of the YNP bison have serological evidence of 
brucellosis, indicating exposure to the disease (Meyer and Meagher, 1995; 
Cheville et al., 1998).  Greater than 40% of the serological positive bison 
are culture-positive for B. abortus, indicating infection with the disease.  
Bison roam free in the YNP and often migrate outside the Park onto 
National Forest public lands and private lands in Montana during the 
winter months.  There is concern that brucellosis-infected bison from the 
YNP may be a potential source for the spread of this disease to cattle 
maintained on these lands outside of the Park.   
 
The Interagency Bison Management Plan (IBMP), signed in 2000, is 
designed to coordinate bison management activities among five State and 
Federal partners1.  Under the IBMP, these five Federal and State agencies 
work cooperatively within an adaptive management framework
Text Len: 1754
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 this disease to cattle 
maintained on these lands outside of the Park.   
 
The Interagency Bison Management Plan (IBMP), signed in 2000, is 
designed to coordinate bison management activities among five State and 
Federal partners1.  Under the IBMP, these five Federal and State agencies 
work cooperatively within an adaptive management framework to 
conserve the YNP wild, free-ranging bison population, while concurrently 
reducing the potential risk of transmission of brucellosis between wildlife 
and cattle populations.  Investigating and mitigating potential modes of 
disease transmission by brucellosis-infected YNP bison that migrate 
outside the Park is an important component of IBMP activities.  
Developing and incorporating effective short- and long-term adaptive 
management strategies are essential to the success of the IBMP’s goals of 
bison management and reduction of the risk of brucellosis transmission.   
 
The United States Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) Animal and Plant 
Health Inspection Service (APHIS) established a national brucellosis 
program to safeguard the health of domestic livestock, maintain the 
economic viability of the U.S. cattle industry in national and international 
trade, protect public health, and ensure food safety.  The goal of the 
program is to eradicate brucellosis from the United States.  Through 
cooperative Federal-State-industry efforts, the United States has made 
significant progress since the program’s inception in 1934.  As of July 
2009, all 50 States achieved Class-Free State status (e.g., disease-free 
status) in cattle.  However, unique challenges impede final eradication.  
APHIS Veterinary Services (VS) recently developed a concept paper  
Text Len: 1726
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 efforts, the United States has made 
significant progress since the program’s inception in 1934.  As of July 
2009, all 50 States achieved Class-Free State status (e.g., disease-free 
status) in cattle.  However, unique challenges impede final eradication.  
APHIS Veterinary Services (VS) recently developed a concept paper  
                                                 
1
 USDOI National Park Service; USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service; USDA Forest 
Service [USFS]; Montana Department of Livestock; and Montana Fish, Wildlife and Parks.  
 1  
(74 Federal Register 51115-51116, October 5, 2009), describing a plan for 
the program that focuses on using a more adaptable science-based 
approach that is both effective and timely and that addresses the unique 
challenges.  One component of the plan that addresses the unique 
challenge posed by the presence of brucellosis in wildlife is to enhance 
efforts to mitigate disease transmission between wildlife and livestock.   
 
APHIS VS has partnered with wildlife agencies and other entities to 
develop risk mitigation strategies to prevent the further spread of 
brucellosis and to enhance efforts to eliminate B. abortus in the United 
States.  The IBMP partners work together, as outlined in the IBMP 
memorandum of understanding, to mitigate the risk of disease 
transmission by brucellosis-infected bison in the Greater Yellowstone 
Area (GYA).  Continued collaborations are needed to develop effective 
strategies to determine the location and range of bru
Text Len: 1535
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 in the United 
States.  The IBMP partners work together, as outlined in the IBMP 
memorandum of understanding, to mitigate the risk of disease 
transmission by brucellosis-infected bison in the Greater Yellowstone 
Area (GYA).  Continued collaborations are needed to develop effective 
strategies to determine the location and range of brucellosis-affected 
wildlife, reduce the prevalence of disease in wildlife, and mitigate the 
potential risks of disease transmission between wildlife and cattle.  
Potential strategies include partnering with State and Federal wildlife 
agencies to conduct wildlife surveillance in areas with brucellosis-affected 
livestock, supporting research to find tools (e.g., vaccination and 
contraceptives) and strategies (e.g., adaptive management) to reduce the 
prevalence of brucellosis in wildlife, and instituting those strategies as 
appropriate. 
 
USDA’s APHIS VS is interested in investigating the potential of venereal 
exposure as a mode of transmission of brucellosis by YNP bison bulls.  It 
is known that bison bulls shed Brucella in their semen (Robison et al., 
1998; Olsen et al., 1999).  However, the potential for transmission of 
brucellosis via the venereal route is not known.  We do know that 
brucellosis can be transmitted by direct contact with infected animals or 
within an environment that has been contaminated with discharges from 
infected animals.  In infected animals, seminal fluids, aborted fetuses, 
placental membranes or fluids and other vaginal discharges from post-
calving or abortion events may be contaminated with infectious Brucella 
organisms. 
 
Determining the potential for venereal
Text Len: 1666
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 animals or 
within an environment that has been contaminated with discharges from 
infected animals.  In infected animals, seminal fluids, aborted fetuses, 
placental membranes or fluids and other vaginal discharges from post-
calving or abortion events may be contaminated with infectious Brucella 
organisms. 
 
Determining the potential for venereal transmission of brucellosis by YNP 
bison bulls would assist in developing effective adaptive management 
strategies that could be included in IBMP operating procedures.  Under the 
current IBMP adaptive management strategy, allowing bison bulls access 
to public lands in Montana year-round is desired and will be evaluated as 
part of the expansion of bison habitat.  This expansion of habitat would 
put bison bulls in closer proximity and potentially increase the opportunity 
for commingling with cattle grazing in the area.  Understanding the 
potential for shedding of B. abortus in the semen of bison bulls is vital to 
assessing the appropriateness of this adaptive management strategy.  The 
 2  
proposed action, a proposed two-phase study described in more detail in 
the Proposed Action section (II.B.), would consist of temporarily 
immobilizing mature bison bulls in limited areas outside of the YNP and 
collecting their semen and blood samples for testing.  People other than 
those involved in this proposed study would not likely be present, and 
environmental impacts would be avoided or minimized. 
 
According to the APHIS’ National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) 
implementing procedures (7 CFR part 372), this proposed action is 
classified as one for which an environmental assessment (EA) is 
appropriate because it is part of the “Development of program plans that 
seek to
Text Len: 1755
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

environmental impacts would be avoided or minimized. 
 
According to the APHIS’ National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) 
implementing procedures (7 CFR part 372), this proposed action is 
classified as one for which an environmental assessment (EA) is 
appropriate because it is part of the “Development of program plans that 
seek to adopt strategies, methods, and techniques as the means of dealing 
with particular animal and plant health risks that may arise in the future,” 
is part of the “Implementation of program plans at the site-specific, action 
level,” and is “Research or testing that will be conducted outside of a 
laboratory or other containment area.” [7 CFR § 372.5(b)(1)(i), (ii) and 
(5)(i)].  Recognizing the substantial interest regarding brucellosis in bison 
in the YNP and bison management activities in the GYA, APHIS has 
prepared this EA.   
 
B. Purpose of and Need for the Proposed Action 
 
The purpose of the proposed action is to conduct a two-phase study to 
evaluate the potential shedding of Brucella abortus in the semen of bison 
bulls from the YNP and to assess the potential for venereal transmission of 
brucellosis by infected bison bulls.  The overall goal of the proposed two-
phase study is twofold:  1) to ascertain data and information essential to 
scientific and epidemiologically sound decision-making regarding bison 
management activities and adaptive management strategies such as habitat 
access, and 2) to facilitate the understanding of the potential role of 
brucellosis-infected bison bulls in venereal transmission of brucellosis
Text Len: 1591
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-
phase study is twofold:  1) to ascertain data and information essential to 
scientific and epidemiologically sound decision-making regarding bison 
management activities and adaptive management strategies such as habitat 
access, and 2) to facilitate the understanding of the potential role of 
brucellosis-infected bison bulls in venereal transmission of brucellosis.  
Evaluation of these issues would further efforts to improve the health of 
the wild, free-ranging bison population in the GYA and enhance the 
quality of the environment in the GYA.  Data and information garnered 
from this proposed study would be useful for efforts to reduce the 
potential risk of brucellosis transmission between bison and cattle while 
conserving the free-ranging nature of the YNP bison population. 
 
The need for Phase 1 of the proposed study is to collect samples to 
evaluate the semen from mature Yellowstone bison bulls for shedding of 
B. abortus, in order to determine if infective doses of B. abortus are shed 
in the semen, and to determine if semen quality is affected by B. abortus 
infection.  This information is needed to determine and implement 
appropriate strategies and adaptive management practices such as habitat 
expansion while assuring mitigation of the risk of disease transmission to 
cattle grazing in the area.  In addition, activities conducted in Phase 1 of 
 3  
the proposed study would provide for validation of the sample collection 
and evaluation procedures as the same collection and evaluation 
procedures would be used in Phase 2 of the proposed study. 
 
The need for Phase 2 of the proposed study is to assess the role of bison 
bulls in venereal transmission of brucellosis.  This assessment is needed to 
provide
Text Len: 1751
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 would provide for validation of the sample collection 
and evaluation procedures as the same collection and evaluation 
procedures would be used in Phase 2 of the proposed study. 
 
The need for Phase 2 of the proposed study is to assess the role of bison 
bulls in venereal transmission of brucellosis.  This assessment is needed to 
provide information essential to developing appropriate and effective 
disease management and elimination strategies.  Proposals to eliminate 
brucellosis from Yellowstone bison using nonlethal strategies currently 
focus on ways of eliminating the shedding of the disease organism by 
bison cows at calving (Miller, et al., 2004).  If venereal transmission by 
bison bulls contributes to the spread of brucellosis within the YNP bison 
population and possibly to cattle outside the YNP, further development 
and implementation of mitigation strategies that include bison bulls may 
be warranted.  Information garnered from this proposed study would be 
valuable to YNP’s bison vaccination strategy.  Conversely, if venereal 
transmission by bison bulls does not contribute to the spread of 
brucellosis, then resources and activities focused on limiting bison bull 
activities might not be warranted or could be modified to maximize risk 
mitigation activities. 
 
Overall, this proposed study would provide information regarding the 
shedding of Brucella by mature bison bulls and allow for the assessment 
of the potential risk of disease transmission between bison bulls and cattle 
in the same proximity.  The proposed study would help determine the 
level of shedding of Brucella during the non-rut season (Phase 1 of the 
proposed study) as compared to the rut season (Phase 2 of the proposed 
study).  Data would be
Text Len: 1759
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 the assessment 
of the potential risk of disease transmission between bison bulls and cattle 
in the same proximity.  The proposed study would help determine the 
level of shedding of Brucella during the non-rut season (Phase 1 of the 
proposed study) as compared to the rut season (Phase 2 of the proposed 
study).  Data would be garnered on the prevalence of shedding of Brucella 
by mature bison bulls from the YNP.  In addition, the proposed study 
would more specifically evaluate levels of shedding of Brucella and the 
subsequent impact on semen quality, viability, and infectivity.  This 
information would be useful for assessing the brucellosis status of the 
YNP bison breeding population.  Mitigating transmission of brucellosis 
within the YNP bison population would further the long-term goal of 
conserving a wild, disease-free, bison population which in turn would 
restore and enhance the quality of the environment. 
 II. Proposed Action and Alternatives 
 
A. No Action (the Current Situation)  
 
The No Action alternative would result in no proposed study.  The 
purpose of the proposed study is to better understand the potential risk for 
disease transmission by brucellosis-infected bison bulls from the YNP and 
assess the potential impact of this risk on adaptive management strategies.  
 4  
Without this proposed study, managers would continue to follow the 
current “no tolerance” strategy of bison bulls outside the Park during 
designated times of the year.  The “no tolerance” strategy is predicated on 
the assumption that brucellosis-infected bison bulls pose a risk of disease 
transmission.  Without this proposed study,
Text Len: 1658
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 this proposed study, managers would continue to follow the 
current “no tolerance” strategy of bison bulls outside the Park during 
designated times of the year.  The “no tolerance” strategy is predicated on 
the assumption that brucellosis-infected bison bulls pose a risk of disease 
transmission.  Without this proposed study, information to quantify and 
assess this potential risk of disease transmission would not be collected.  
Data and information to assess the potential for venereal transmission of 
disease by brucellosis-infected bison bulls would not be ascertained as 
well. 
 
B. Proposed Action 
 
The proposed action is a two-phase study designed to address shedding of 
B. abortus in the semen of bison bulls that have migrated out of the YNP 
in the winter and spring and to investigate the potential for venereal 
transmission of disease by brucellosis-infected bison bulls in the GYA.  
Each phase of the proposed study would be conducted under the 
appropriate permits for the study locations. 
 
Phase 1 of the proposed study would be conducted under a Montana Fish, 
Wildlife and Parks (MFWP) Research and Technical Services Animal 
Care and Use Committee permit with MFWP assistance.  MFWP has the 
jurisdiction to capture wildlife on the Forest Service (USFS) lands in 
Montana where Phase 1 of the proposed study would be conducted.  Phase 
1 would be conducted on USFS public lands in the IBMP Zone 2 area on 
the west side of the YNP, where IBMP bison management activities 
routinely occur each spring, and in the Eagle Creek/Bear Creek Special 
Management Area on the north side of
Text Len: 1614
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
Montana where Phase 1 of the proposed study would be conducted.  Phase 
1 would be conducted on USFS public lands in the IBMP Zone 2 area on 
the west side of the YNP, where IBMP bison management activities 
routinely occur each spring, and in the Eagle Creek/Bear Creek Special 
Management Area on the north side of the YNP, where bison are allowed 
year-round2.  Phase 1 would occur in April/May 2010 when bison bulls 
are normally present in the IBMP Zone 2 areas.  Field activities to 
accomplish Phase 1 of the proposed study would be conducted daily as 
bison bulls become available in the proposed study areas during the 
months of April and May until hazing of bison begins on or about May 15, 
2010.  The IBMP Zone 2 field locations used in Phase 1 of the proposed 
study would be accessed in accordance with Gallatin National Forest 
Service travel plans.  If migration of bison bulls out of the YNP in 
April/May 2010 to either location is limited in number, it may be 
necessary to conduct the proposed Phase 1 study activities again in 2011, 
perhaps as early as February 15, in order to collect the statistically 
determined number of samples needed.   
 
The location for Phase 2 of the proposed study has yet to be determined.  
Details of Phase 2 of the proposed study would be finalized based on the 
successful completion of Phase 1 of the proposed study.  Given that the 
                                                 
2
 For maps of these areas, see http
Text Len: 1480
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 on the 
successful completion of Phase 1 of the proposed study.  Given that the 
                                                 
2
 For maps of these areas, see http://ibmp.info/Library/2%20-%20State%20ROD3%20-%20Maps.pdf 
.  
 5  
goal of Phase 2 of the proposed study is to assess the potential for venereal 
transmission of disease by brucellosis-infected bison bulls, Phase 2 of the 
proposed study would be conducted during or as close as possible to the 
rut season in September/October 2012.  Once a location is determined for 
Phase 2 of the proposed study, this EA would be supplemented to reflect a 
NEPA review of applicable issues. 
 
A statistical analysis determined that samples from 50 individual bison 
bulls would be needed for each Phase of the proposed study.  This analysis 
is based on the assumption that the population of bison bulls in the YNP is 
approximately 1,500 and that 20% of the seropositive bison bulls in the 
YNP would be shedding B. abortus in their semen.  This sample size 
assures a 99% confidence of finding at least one bull shedding B. abortus 
and provides for adequate evaluation of semen quality. 
 
The proposed study would include the following activities: 
 Temporarily immobilizing the bison bulls, 
 Collecting blood and semen samples from them, and 
 Testing and evaluating those blood and semen samples. 
 
Capture
Text Len: 1374
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 one bull shedding B. abortus 
and provides for adequate evaluation of semen quality. 
 
The proposed study would include the following activities: 
 Temporarily immobilizing the bison bulls, 
 Collecting blood and semen samples from them, and 
 Testing and evaluating those blood and semen samples. 
 
Capture and temporary immobilization of the bison bulls would be 
accomplished using established safe chemical immobilization and 
recovery techniques for bison to ensure the health and safety of the bison 
and study personnel.  Veterinary oversight for animal care and handling, 
immobilization, and sample collection would be provided during the 
proposed study activities.  Wildlife biologists trained and experienced in 
the capture and handling of bison would also be participating in the 
proposed study activities.  Chemical immobilization would be 
administered via darting from the ground by qualified individuals.  It is 
expected that the bison would be chemically immobilized and restrained 
for no more than 20 minutes and would be appropriately monitored 
throughout this time.  After the study samples are collected and the 
identification tags applied, the chemical immobilization would be reversed 
and the bison would be observed to assure a full recovery.   
 
Collection of blood and semen samples and application of identification 
tags would be performed by the veterinarians and wildlife biologists.  
Blood samples would be collected using safe venipuncture techniques, and 
semen samples would be obtained using established standard bull semen 
collection techniques.  Each bison bull would be fitted with an eartag and 
marked with a non-permanent visual marker.  The eartag would identify 
the animal as having received a controlled substance and would provide a 
phone number to call should
Text Len: 1824
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 using safe venipuncture techniques, and 
semen samples would be obtained using established standard bull semen 
collection techniques.  Each bison bull would be fitted with an eartag and 
marked with a non-permanent visual marker.  The eartag would identify 
the animal as having received a controlled substance and would provide a 
phone number to call should the animal be harvested during a native hunt 
or the Montana bison hunting season.  The same techniques for sample 
collection would be used in both Phases of the proposed study. 
 
 6  
Testing and evaluation of the blood samples collected from the bison bulls 
in this proposed study would be performed in the laboratory.  The semen 
samples collected from the bison bulls in this proposed study would be 
evaluated in the field for semen quality and sent to the laboratory for 
additional testing. 
 
C. Other Possible Alternatives to Proposed Action 
 
APHIS is exploring and considering potential feasible locations for Phase 
2 of the proposed study.  APHIS is open to partnering with appropriate 
land and wildlife management agencies to conduct Phase 2 of the 
proposed study; however, no agreements are in place at this time. 
 
D. Other Alternatives Considered but Dismissed 
 from Further Consideration 
 
APHIS VS considered the alternative of conducting Phase 1 of the 
proposed study in conjunction with other bison management activities.  
One such activity might be if and when bison bulls are captured during 
IBMP activities related to testing and shipping to slaughter.  However, 
capturing, testing, and shipping bison to slaughter varies from year to year.  
The numbers of bison bulls available during the aforementioned bison 
management activities could be limited and might not provide
Text Len: 1772
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 activities.  
One such activity might be if and when bison bulls are captured during 
IBMP activities related to testing and shipping to slaughter.  However, 
capturing, testing, and shipping bison to slaughter varies from year to year.  
The numbers of bison bulls available during the aforementioned bison 
management activities could be limited and might not provide for the 
statistically determined number of samples needed for the proposed study.  
In addition, bison bulls of the age group needed for this proposed study are 
not easily handled in the trapping facilities and pose a greater safety risk 
both to proposed study personnel and to the bison bulls themselves.  
Capture activities occur at a time of year when the bison bulls are further 
from their rut, thus precluding their use in Phase 2 of the proposed study.  
Therefore, this alternative has been dismissed from further consideration. 
 
APHIS VS also considered the alternative to conduct Phase 1 of the 
proposed study during other times of the year.  This alternative was 
dismissed from further consideration because bison bulls are not tolerated 
outside the YNP during other times of the year.  
 
 
III. Potential Environmental Impacts 
 
The NEPA implementing regulations provide criteria that Federal agencies 
should evaluate, if applicable, in environmental documents for proposed 
actions.  This section of the EA addresses the applicable criteria related to 
potential impacts from the No Action alternative and from the proposed 
action.  NEPA criteria that are applicable for consideration in this section 
 7  
of the document include animal impacts, human health and safety, and the 
physical environment.  
 
A. No Action 
 
Without the proposed action, efforts to gather scientific information to 
better understand the potential
Text Len: 1825
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 from the No Action alternative and from the proposed 
action.  NEPA criteria that are applicable for consideration in this section 
 7  
of the document include animal impacts, human health and safety, and the 
physical environment.  
 
A. No Action 
 
Without the proposed action, efforts to gather scientific information to 
better understand the potential risk for disease transmission by brucellosis-
infected bison bulls in the GYA would be hindered.  The opportunity to 
further evaluate the merits of adaptive management strategies which 
currently limit bison habitat in order to mitigate the risk of disease 
transmission to cattle would be lost, as would be the consideration of 
expanding bison habitat.  Without the proposed action to assist in 
developing strategies to effectively control and eliminate brucellosis, the 
disease may continue to spread within the wild, free-ranging bison 
population in the GYA.   
 
B. Proposed Action 
 
Brucellosis is a serious disease of livestock and wildlife that has 
significant animal health, public health, and international trade 
consequences.  Brucellosis is a contagious disease, caused by bacteria of 
the genus Brucella, which affects both animals and humans.  Brucella 
abortus mainly affects cattle, bison, and swine; however, other species of 
animals and humans are susceptible as well.  In cattle and bison, the 
disease localizes in the lymph nodes and in the reproductive organs and/or 
the udder, causing spontaneous abortions in dams or birth of weak 
offspring, as well as systemic effects in both males and females.  
Infertility, decreased milk production, weight loss, and lameness may also 
be associated with
Text Len: 1687
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 cattle and bison, the 
disease localizes in the lymph nodes and in the reproductive organs and/or 
the udder, causing spontaneous abortions in dams or birth of weak 
offspring, as well as systemic effects in both males and females.  
Infertility, decreased milk production, weight loss, and lameness may also 
be associated with brucellosis infection.  There is no effective means of 
treating brucellosis in livestock and wildlife.  In humans, brucellosis, often 
called undulant fever, causes generalized musculoskeletal malaise, flu-like 
symptoms, and pain and fatigue.  The symptoms can last for years and 
may develop into a variety of chronic conditions.  Humans can be treated 
for brucellosis with a rigorous course of antibiotic therapy. 
 
1. Animal Impacts   
 
a. Bison Bulls 
 
The proposed study involves temporarily immobilizing and restraining 
bison bulls.  The objective for the immobilization and handling of the 
individual bison is to collect semen and blood samples to determine the 
brucellosis status of the animal and to evaluate the possible shedding of   
B. abortus in the semen of infected bulls.  This information will be used to 
consider expansion of bison habitat outside the YNP and to assess the 
potential for venereal transmission of brucellosis by bison bulls.   
 8  
Ensuring humane handling and treatment of the bison bulls during the 
proposed study activities is a priority.  The activities would be conducted 
as quickly and efficiently as possible and in a manner that would prevent 
undue stress, trauma, injury, or any unnecessary discomfort to the animal.   
Bison bulls would
Text Len: 1626
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.   
 8  
Ensuring humane handling and treatment of the bison bulls during the 
proposed study activities is a priority.  The activities would be conducted 
as quickly and efficiently as possible and in a manner that would prevent 
undue stress, trauma, injury, or any unnecessary discomfort to the animal.   
Bison bulls would be immobilized only at locations that are safe for the 
bison and the proposed study personnel.  Veterinary oversight for animal 
care and handling, immobilization, and sample collection would be 
provided during the proposed study activities.  Wildlife biologists trained 
and experienced in the capture and handling of bison would also be 
participating in the proposed study activities.  
 
The bison bulls would be temporarily immobilized via darting from the 
ground, using the standard administration protocol of FDA-approved 
anesthetic and analgesic drugs conventionally used in wildlife 
management activities.  Blood samples would be collected via 
venipuncture technique, and semen samples would be obtained using 
established standard bull semen collection techniques.  Once the proposed 
study samples were collected, the chemical immobilization drug would be 
reversed, allowing each animal to recover within minutes of 
administration.   
 
Given the analgesic nature of the chemical immobilization compounds, it 
is anticipated that the bison bulls would not experience negative impacts 
during the collection of study samples.  It is expected that they would be 
immobilized and restrained for no more than 20 minutes.  Their vital signs 
would be monitored throughout the sampling procedures and initial 
recovery phase.  Every precaution would be taken to prevent 
immobilization and handling-related trauma, injuries, or death to the 
bison.  The standard chemical immobilization protocol that would
Text Len: 1847
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 expected that they would be 
immobilized and restrained for no more than 20 minutes.  Their vital signs 
would be monitored throughout the sampling procedures and initial 
recovery phase.  Every precaution would be taken to prevent 
immobilization and handling-related trauma, injuries, or death to the 
bison.  The standard chemical immobilization protocol that would be used 
in this proposed study does not have long-term physical or physiological 
effects.  The bison bulls would be observed for as long as they are visible 
after recovery.  No harmful or negative impacts to the bison bulls are 
expected due to the proposed action.  
 
b. Non-Target Species 
 
Some non-target species may be temporarily impacted while activities 
associated with this proposed study are occurring.  However, the proposed 
study activities would occur for brief periods of time only on days when 
bison bulls are present in the proposed study area.  The temporary impacts 
that might occur to non-target species during the proposed study activities 
are the same in nature as temporary impacts associated with IBMP 
activities and were analyzed in the “Bison Management Plan 
Environmental Imapct Statement” (BMP EIS) (USDOI and USDA, 2000).  
These types of activities were determined to be not likely to adversely 
affect non-target species.   
 9  
 
Immobilized bison bulls would be monitored as they return to their 
environment.  If circumstances should indicate the need to euthanize a 
bison bull that has been chemically immobilized as part of the proposed 
study activities, the carcass would be removed and incinerated or buried in 
a secure landfill.  Therefore, chemical immobilization of bison bulls is not 

Text Len: 1712
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 bison bulls would be monitored as they return to their 
environment.  If circumstances should indicate the need to euthanize a 
bison bull that has been chemically immobilized as part of the proposed 
study activities, the carcass would be removed and incinerated or buried in 
a secure landfill.  Therefore, chemical immobilization of bison bulls is not 
likely to adversely affect non-target species, including predators and 
scavengers.   
 
2. Human Health and Safety  
 
a. The General Public 
 
Brucellosis is a zoonotic disease that can infect people, causing undulant 
fever.  Symptoms include intermittent fever, chills, night sweats, body and 
joint pain, poor appetite, and weakness.  The general public would be at no 
risk of contracting the disease from bison as a result of the study activities.  
 
b. Hunters  
 
Generally, hunting does not occur during the time of year that Phase 1 of 
the study is planned.  However, U.S. treaties with some Native American 
groups allow hunting without restrictions for time of year and number of 
bison taken.  Phase 1 study activities would be carried out in areas where 
Native American groups could hunt according to treaties.  If hunting 
activities by these groups are still occurring during the study timeframe, 
APHIS would ensure communications with Native American group 
officials about the study activities on mature bison bulls.  In addition, 
APHIS would fit the study bulls with eartags, identifying them as having 
been administered controlled substances.  A 45-day withdrawal period is 
required after use of the drugs before the bison meat could be consumed.  
Should one of the study bison be harvested,
Text Len: 1677
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

officials about the study activities on mature bison bulls.  In addition, 
APHIS would fit the study bulls with eartags, identifying them as having 
been administered controlled substances.  A 45-day withdrawal period is 
required after use of the drugs before the bison meat could be consumed.  
Should one of the study bison be harvested, the eartag would provide a 
telephone number for the hunter to call for information to determine when 
the animal was administered the drugs. 
 
c. Other Potential Land Users   
 
During the time and in the Zone 2 locations proposed for the study, USFS 
does not allow recreational activities on USFS land because of IBMP 
operational activities.  Therefore, no change in impacts would occur to 
land use by recreationists during this time of year as a result of the study 
activities.  
 
 
 
 
 
 10  
d. Worker Safety/Occupational Safety 
 
The study team would follow a protocol that includes operational safety 
considerations for ensuring the health and safety of the team members.  At 
least one cell phone would be available for all communications outside of 
the team.  Study personnel would notify USFS authorities in advance of 
any planned bison capture and immobilization activities.  
 
Bison would be captured in locations that are safe for both bison and the 
study team members.  One person on the team would be responsible for 
monitoring other nearby bison to alert the team of any dangerous behavior.  
As grizzly bears are known to frequent the proposed study areas and could  
be active during Phase 1 of the study, the study team would be alert for 
bears in the area and would carry bear spray at
Text Len: 1662
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
study team members.  One person on the team would be responsible for 
monitoring other nearby bison to alert the team of any dangerous behavior.  
As grizzly bears are known to frequent the proposed study areas and could  
be active during Phase 1 of the study, the study team would be alert for 
bears in the area and would carry bear spray at all times.   
 
As it is unknown as to whether the bison bulls may be infected with 
brucellosis, all personnel handling bison would wear protective gloves and 
take precautions to prevent direct contact with fluid samples drawn.  The 
study team would also carry disinfectant to thoroughly clean/wash if 
needed. 
 
Personnel who would be involved in the study activities have a variety of 
expertise and experience needed to carry out the study activities, including 
wildlife chemical immobilization using darting technique, proficiency in 
darting, veterinary care, animal restraint, tagging and marking animals, 
sample collection, and bison bull reproductive evaluation.   
 
In the event of human exposure to the immobilization drugs, syringes with 
appropriate levels of a reversal drug would be drawn up and available.  
Drugs used for the study would be stored in a safe or lockable device in 
transit and reversal drugs would be available during the study activities in 
the field.  First aid kits would be available at all times.   
 
3. Vegetation and Physical Environment  
 
This section of the EA considers the potential impacts on components of 
the physical environment, specifically vegetation, soil, and water.  
 
a. Vegetation and Soil 
 
The time of year the study activities would occur is the early to mid-spring 
season when
Text Len: 1695
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   
 
3. Vegetation and Physical Environment  
 
This section of the EA considers the potential impacts on components of 
the physical environment, specifically vegetation, soil, and water.  
 
a. Vegetation and Soil 
 
The time of year the study activities would occur is the early to mid-spring 
season when snow cover is possible.  Activities under the proposed study 
that could impact vegetation and soil include physical access to USFS 
land.  Other study activities, such as darting and drawing fluid samples, 
are not likely to impact the physical environment.   
 
 11  
APHIS, VS would be accessing USFS land in compliance with Gallatin 
National Forest Travel Plans for access.  A combination of snow 
machines, horses, vehicles and travel by foot would be used to access 
Zone 2, as allowed according to the Travel Plans. In following the Travel 
Plans, minimal disturbance to vegetation and soil on the ground surface 
would occur from land access.  
 
The use of darts to temporarily immobilize the bison bulls is not likely to 
result in impacts to ground cover, vegetation, or soil.  Although it is 
possible that a dart might not complete intramuscular penetration of the 
bull or could miss the intended target, the study personnel doing the 
darting would be sufficiently knowledgeable to handle the situation.  If a 
dart were to miss the intended target, study team members would make 
every effort to recover the dart.  Darts would be made to be easily 
identifiable.  In the event a lost dart is not recovered, the study team would 
document this occurrence and notify USFS with information relative to the 
occurrence.   
 
One scenario
Text Len: 1660
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

dart were to miss the intended target, study team members would make 
every effort to recover the dart.  Darts would be made to be easily 
identifiable.  In the event a lost dart is not recovered, the study team would 
document this occurrence and notify USFS with information relative to the 
occurrence.   
 
One scenario considered is the dart imploding upon impact on the bison 
bull and, for some reason, not successfully penetrating the animal and then 
falling onto the ground.  Under this scenario, the anesthesia mixture (10 
milligrams) would adsorb quickly into the snow (and then be diluted) or 
into the soil (and then be adsorbed).  Since the amount of the drug would 
be minute and would not be available for ingestion by wildlife (because of 
being diluted into the snow and/or adsorbing into the soil), there would be 
negligible impact on the environment.  
 
b. Water 
 
Bison would be captured in locations that are safe for both bison and staff.  
Unsafe locations may include waterways, roads or other obstacles that 
interfere with the immobilization of bison.  The study activities would not 
directly impact water because they would be carried out on ground surface 
away from water resources.  The types of activities involved would have 
minimal, if any, impact to nearby water resources.   
 
c. Recreational and Cultural Land Uses 
 
(1) Recreational Land Use  
 
During the timeframe and location for the proposed study activities, 
recreational activities are restricted because of IBMP operational activities 
that occur in Zone 2 at that time of year.  Therefore, no change would 
occur to land
Text Len: 1628
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   
 
c. Recreational and Cultural Land Uses 
 
(1) Recreational Land Use  
 
During the timeframe and location for the proposed study activities, 
recreational activities are restricted because of IBMP operational activities 
that occur in Zone 2 at that time of year.  Therefore, no change would 
occur to land use by recreationists during this time of year as a result of 
the study activities.  Prior to carrying out the study activities, APHIS, VS 
would communicate its intentions with USFS and public agencies that 
 12  
carry out IBMP operational activities.  APHIS would continue to 
communicate with these public agencies during the study timeframe in 
order to ensure that the study activities do not conflict with or impede 
IBMP activities.  
 
(2) Native American Hunting Rights 
  
Three Native American groups (the Nez Perce Tribe, the Confederated 
Salish and Kootenai Tribes, and the Shoshone-Bannock Tribes) have 
reserved hunting rights in the public lands designated as Zone 2 in the 
IBMP.  These USFS lands are termed “unoccupied lands of the United 
States” in the treaties with these Native American groups.  The timing and 
study area of Phase 1 activities may coincide with the hunting activities of 
at least one of these tribes.  If Native American hunters are still hunting in 
the study area at the time for Phase 1 study activities to begin, APHIS 
would brief the tribal hunting authorities about the APHIS study activities 
prior to starting them.  The briefing would include information about the 
study protocol, the drugs that would be used for temporary 
immobilization, drug withdrawal times, and the marking
Text Len: 1648
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 are still hunting in 
the study area at the time for Phase 1 study activities to begin, APHIS 
would brief the tribal hunting authorities about the APHIS study activities 
prior to starting them.  The briefing would include information about the 
study protocol, the drugs that would be used for temporary 
immobilization, drug withdrawal times, and the marking of immobilized 
bison bulls. 
 
IV. Other Environmental Review  Requirements  
A. Endangered or Threatened Species 
 
Section 7 of the Endangered Species Act (ESA) and ESA’s implementing 
regulations require Federal agencies to ensure that their actions are not 
likely to jeopardize the continued existence of endangered or threatened 
species or result in the destruction or adverse modification of critical 
habitat.  Therefore, the following section discusses the effect of the 
proposed action and No Action alternatives on federally listed threatened 
and endangered species in Gallatin and Park Counties in Montana. 
Three federally listed threatened species occur in Gallatin County:  Ute 
ladies’ tresses (Spiranthes diluvialis), grizzly bear (Ursus arctos 
horribilis), and Canada lynx (Lynx canadensis) and its designated critical 
habitat.  Only the grizzly bear and the Canada lynx and its critical habitat 
occur in Park County.  APHIS has determined that the proposed bison bull 
semen study would have no effect on these species or designated critical 
habitat for the following reasons: 
In Montana, Ute ladies’-tresses are found in the Middle Rockies-Blue 
Mountains ecoregion (Fertig et al., 2005).  The proposed study area does 
not occur in this e
Text Len: 1631
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 proposed bison bull 
semen study would have no effect on these species or designated critical 
habitat for the following reasons: 
In Montana, Ute ladies’-tresses are found in the Middle Rockies-Blue 
Mountains ecoregion (Fertig et al., 2005).  The proposed study area does 
not occur in this ecoregion.   
 13  
Grizzly bears and Canada lynx may occur in the study area, but are 
unlikely to be found in the open rangeland area where capture and 
temporary immobilization of bison bulls would occur.   
 
Primary constituent elements of Canada lynx critical habitat include boreal 
forest landscapes supporting a mosaic of differing successional forest 
stages and containing snowshoe hares, sites for denning, and other habitat 
that lynx may travel through to access boreal forest (USDOI, 2009).  The 
temporary activities of capture and immobilization would have no effect 
on this habitat and would only occur in open rangeland that would be used 
to access preferred sites.   
 
B.  Bald Eagle and Gold en Eagle Protection Act  
 
Although no longer a federally listed endangered or threatened species in 
most areas of the United States, including Montana, the bald eagle is 
protected by the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act and the Migratory 
Bird Treaty Act.  Bald eagles are sensitive to human activities, such as 
recreational activities and resource and urban development.  Although 
bald eagles are sensitive to human activities, they do appear to acclimate 
to some activities occurring at predictable frequencies, intensities, and 
time limits.  In Montana and Wyoming, nest building starts in January and 

Text Len: 1628
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Act.  Bald eagles are sensitive to human activities, such as 
recreational activities and resource and urban development.  Although 
bald eagles are sensitive to human activities, they do appear to acclimate 
to some activities occurring at predictable frequencies, intensities, and 
time limits.  In Montana and Wyoming, nest building starts in January and 
fledging of young ends in July.  Early in the season with nest building and 
egg laying, they are most sensitive to human activity.  Depending on the 
type of activity, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) guidelines 
recommend buffers for different activities.  The buffers generally 
suggested for eagles include a 330-foot buffer from nests during the 
breeding season from any activities.  There have historically been bald 
eagle nests in Zone 2 areas.  Prior to initiating sample collections APHIS 
would confer with USFS to ensure that study activities do not interfere 
with bald eagles in proposed study areas. 
 
C. Historic and Cultural Resources 
 
The activities described as the proposed action in this EA are within the 
range of activities that were considered in the BMP, the IBMP supporting 
analysis.  The proposed action is a research study that is associated with 
adaptive management actions under the IBMP.  The types of activities 
associated with the study would not affect historic sites.  Because the 
proposed action would occur on USFS lands, APHIS confirmed with 
USFS that the proposed action presents no concerns and no effects to 
historic and cultural resources.   
 
The BMP EIS addresses the importance of bison, including their 
importance to the cultural landscapes and visual resources of the GYA.  
 14  
Bison are a
Text Len: 1716
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 occur on USFS lands, APHIS confirmed with 
USFS that the proposed action presents no concerns and no effects to 
historic and cultural resources.   
 
The BMP EIS addresses the importance of bison, including their 
importance to the cultural landscapes and visual resources of the GYA.  
 14  
Bison are a cultural resource to many, including Native American tribes, 
GYA residents, the American viewing public, and public agencies.   
 
During bison management activities carried out by public agencies in 
accordance with the BMP EIS, bison may be marked using a variety of 
techniques, including ear tags, paper backtags, paint, peroxide, hair dye 
stripes, and clipped hair.  Marking techniques vary by public agency, the 
purpose, and location.  Markings during bison management activities 
serve a purpose, e.g., to prevent testing a bison multiple times or to 
indicate that a bison has tested negative for the Brucella organism.  Some 
marking techniques are visible from 100 yards or farther.  Some markings 
are temporary, such as those made with paint, and their duration can 
depend on the weather conditions.  Temporary markings are often visible 
until the bison shed their winter fur in the spring.  Although tags used to 
identify bison during management activities are visually intrusive, they are 
necessary to minimize the need to capture and handle the bison more than 
once to determine its brucellosis status.  The BMP EIS addresses marking 
and other bison identification techniques as actions that alter the historic 
image of the bison and that would have a temporary, moderate impact on 
the historic landscapes of the GYA.  The use of a non
Text Len: 1668
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
necessary to minimize the need to capture and handle the bison more than 
once to determine its brucellosis status.  The BMP EIS addresses marking 
and other bison identification techniques as actions that alter the historic 
image of the bison and that would have a temporary, moderate impact on 
the historic landscapes of the GYA.  The use of a non-permanent visual 
marker and an ear tag during the proposed study activities would impact 
bison in the same way. 
 
Some activities associated with the proposed study, such as identifying a 
bison with an ear tag and a non-permanent visual marker, are important 
for the study but would impact the bison in an aesthetic manner.  Using 
markers on bison bulls from the proposed study also serves the purpose of 
identifying the bison for potential hunters, such as Native Americans who 
have treaty rights to hunt during the study time period, who might 
otherwise harvest and consume meat from a darted bison.  Although these 
actions are not physically harmful to the bison, they may be temporarily 
visually unappealing to the public.   
 
 
V. Cumulative Impacts 
 
This EA examines the activities associated with a proposed study to assess 
the shedding and potential for venereal transmission of B. abortus by 
bison bulls in the GYA.  Activities associated with the proposed study are 
not expected to result in adverse cumulative effects. 
 
Since Phase 1 of the proposed study would occur during the same time of 
year as other IBMP activities, there could be a temporary secondary 
impact to these activities.  However, the study group and IBMP partners 
would be communicating with one another throughout this time regarding 
on-going activities. 
Text Len: 1710
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

not expected to result in adverse cumulative effects. 
 
Since Phase 1 of the proposed study would occur during the same time of 
year as other IBMP activities, there could be a temporary secondary 
impact to these activities.  However, the study group and IBMP partners 
would be communicating with one another throughout this time regarding 
on-going activities.  Spatial separation would be maintained should any 
 15  
proposed study and IBMP activities occur simultaneously.  In addition, 
based on previous field studies of bison involving immobilization, it is 
anticipated that bison bulls may become sensitive to capture disturbance 
and wary of the proposed study activities, thus avoiding these areas.  
However, the study is of short duration; therefore, if this impact occurs, it 
should also be short-lived.    
 
One of the goals of the IBMP is to manage temporal and spatial separation 
of bison and cattle to mitigate potential transmission of brucellosis.  
Currently, this is accomplished through hazing, capture, test and slaughter 
of sero-positive animals and vaccination of sero-negative animals, and a 
limited hunt in Montana.  The proposed study may provide important 
information that would allow for re-evaluation and re-consideration of 
some of the current IBMP activities.  This may result in impacts to future 
decision-making regarding protocols for bison habitat management, bison 
vaccination strategies, and the bison hunt activities.  IBMP activities that 
could be impacted include strategies to maintain appropriate bison 
population and distribution should bison habitat be expanded. 
 
 
VI. Agencies or Persons Contacted 
 
U.S. Forest Service, Gallatin National Forest 
 
Montana Fish, Wildlife
Text Len: 1738
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
vaccination strategies, and the bison hunt activities.  IBMP activities that 
could be impacted include strategies to maintain appropriate bison 
population and distribution should bison habitat be expanded. 
 
 
VI. Agencies or Persons Contacted 
 
U.S. Forest Service, Gallatin National Forest 
 
Montana Fish, Wildlife and Parks 
 
USDA, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Veterinary Services 
 
USDA, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Policy and Program 
Development, Environmental and Risk Analysis Services 
 
 
VII. References 
 
Cheville, N.F., McCullough, D.R., and Paulson, L.R., 1998.  Brucellosis 
in the Greater Yellowstone Area.  National Research Council.  National 
Academy Press.  Washington, D.C.  186pp. 
 
Fertig, W., Black, R., and Wolken, P., 2005.  Range wide status review of 
Ute ladies’-tresses (Spiranthes diluvialis).  Prepared for the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service and Central Utah Water Conservancy District.  
30 September 2005.  101 pp. 
 
Meyer, M.E., and Meagher, M., 1995.  Brucellosis in free-ranging bison 
(Bison bison) in Yellowstone, Grand Teton, and Wood Buffalo National 
 16  
 17  
Parks: A review.  (letter to the editor)  Journal of Wildlife Diseases.  
31:579-598. 
 
Miller, L.A., Rhyan, J., and Drew, M., 2004.  Contraception of bison by 

Text Len: 1311
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Yellowstone, Grand Teton, and Wood Buffalo National 
 16  
 17  
Parks: A review.  (letter to the editor)  Journal of Wildlife Diseases.  
31:579-598. 
 
Miller, L.A., Rhyan, J., and Drew, M., 2004.  Contraception of bison by 
GnRH Vaccine:  A possible means of decreasing transmission of 
brucellosis in bison.  Journal of Wildlife Diseases. 40:725-30. 
 
Olsen, S.C., Rhyan, J., Gidlewski, T., and Palmer, M.V., 1999. Biosafety 
and antibody responses following vaccination of adult bison bulls with 
Brucella abortus strain RB51. American Journal of Veterinary Research. 
60: 905-908. 
 
Robison, C.D., Davis, D.S., Templeton, J.W., Westhusin, M., Foxworth, 
W.B., Gilsdorf, M.J., and Adams, L.G., 1998. Conservation of germ plasm 
from bison infected with Brucella abortus. Journal of Wildlife Diseases 
34: 582-589. 
 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Animal and Plant Health Inspection 
Service, 2009.  Notice of availability of a bovine brucellosis program 
concept paper [Docket No. APHIS-2009-0006]. 74 FR 191:51115-51116, 
October 5.  
 
United States Department of the Interior. 2009.  Endangered and 
Threatened Wildlife and Plants:  Revised Designation of  
Critical Habitat for the Contiguous United States Distinct Population  

Text Len: 1243
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 paper [Docket No. APHIS-2009-0006]. 74 FR 191:51115-51116, 
October 5.  
 
United States Department of the Interior. 2009.  Endangered and 
Threatened Wildlife and Plants:  Revised Designation of  
Critical Habitat for the Contiguous United States Distinct Population  
Segment of the Canada Lynx. Federal Register, Vol. 74, p. 8615-8702, 
February 25, 2009. 
 
U.S. Department of the Interior and U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2000.  
Final Environmental Impact Statement for the Interagency Bison 
Management Plan for the State of Montana and Yellowstone National 
Park.  August 2000.   
 
USDOI and USDA 2000—See U.S. Department of the Interior and U.S. 
Department of Agriculture. 
 
Text Len: 690
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
Study of Shedding and 
Venereal Transmission of 
Brucella abortus by Bison 
Bulls in the Greater 
Yellowstone Area 
 
 
Environmental Assessment 
February 2010 
 
 
 
Study of Shedding and 
Venereal Transmission of 
Brucella abortus by Bison 
Bulls in the Greater 
Yellowstone Area 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment 
February 2010 
 
 
 
 
Agency Contact: 
Dr. Brian McCluskey 
Director – Western Region 
Veterinary Services 
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
U.S. Department of Agriculture 
2150 Centre Avenue, Bldg B, Mailstop 3E13 
Fort Collins, CO  80526-8117 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________________________________________  
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its 
programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, 
religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, or marital or family 
status.  (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.)  Persons with 
disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA’S 
TARGET Center at (202) 720–2600 (voice and TDD). 
 
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 
Room 326–W, Whitten Building, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, 
DC  20250–9410 or call (202) 720–5964 (voice and TDD).  USDA is an
Text Len: 1390
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
202) 720–2600 (voice and TDD). 
 
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 
Room 326–W, Whitten Building, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, 
DC  20250–9410 or call (202) 720–5964 (voice and TDD).  USDA is an equal 
opportunity provider and employer. 
 
Table of Contents 
 
  I.  Introduction ............................................................................... 1 
  A.  Ba ckground ......................................................................... 1 
  B.  Purpose of and N eed for the Proposed Action .................... 3 
 
 II.  Proposed Action and Alternatives ............................................. 4 
A.  No Action (the Current Situation) ........................................ 4 
B.  Proposed Action................................................................... 5 
C.  Other Possible Alternatives to Proposed Action .................. 7 
D. Other Alternatives Considered but Dismissed from  
 Further Consideration .......................................................... 7 
 
III.  Potential Environmental Impacts............................................... 7 
 A.  No Action ............................................................................. 8 
 B.  Propos ed Action .................................................................. 8 
1.  Animal Impacts................................................................ 8 
2.  Human Health and Safety ............................................. 10 
3.  Vegetation and Physical Environment........................... 11 
 
IV.  Other Environmental Review Requirements........................... 13 
A.  Endangered or Threatened Species .................................. 13 
B.  Bald Eagle and Golden Eagle Protection Act..................... 14 
C.  Historic and Cultural Resources......................................... 14 
 
V.  Cumulative Impacts ................................................................. 15 
 
 VI. Agencies or Persons Contacted ............................................. 16 
 
VII. 
Text Len: 2081
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A.  Endangered or Threatened Species .................................. 13 
B.  Bald Eagle and Golden Eagle Protection Act..................... 14 
C.  Historic and Cultural Resources......................................... 14 
 
V.  Cumulative Impacts ................................................................. 15 
 
 VI. Agencies or Persons Contacted ............................................. 16 
 
VII.  References ............................................................................ 16 
 
I. Introduction 
 
A. Background 
 
The wild, free-ranging bison in Yellowstone National Park (YNP) are an 
essential part of the biological, ecological, cultural, and aesthetic aspects 
of the Park.  Yellowstone bison are chronically infected with Brucella 
abortus, the causative agent of bovine brucellosis.  Studies estimate that 
between 40% to 60% of the YNP bison have serological evidence of 
brucellosis, indicating exposure to the disease (Meyer and Meagher, 1995; 
Cheville et al., 1998).  Greater than 40% of the serological positive bison 
are culture-positive for B. abortus, indicating infection with the disease.  
Bison roam free in the YNP and often migrate outside the Park onto 
National Forest public lands and private lands in Montana during the 
winter months.  There is concern that brucellosis-infected bison from the 
YNP may be a potential source for the spread of this disease to cattle 
maintained on these lands outside of the Park.   
 
The Interagency Bison Management Plan (IBMP), signed in 2000, is 
designed to coordinate bison management activities among five State and 
Federal partners1.  Under the IBMP, these five Federal and State agencies 
work cooperatively within an adaptive management framework
Text Len: 1754
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 this disease to cattle 
maintained on these lands outside of the Park.   
 
The Interagency Bison Management Plan (IBMP), signed in 2000, is 
designed to coordinate bison management activities among five State and 
Federal partners1.  Under the IBMP, these five Federal and State agencies 
work cooperatively within an adaptive management framework to 
conserve the YNP wild, free-ranging bison population, while concurrently 
reducing the potential risk of transmission of brucellosis between wildlife 
and cattle populations.  Investigating and mitigating potential modes of 
disease transmission by brucellosis-infected YNP bison that migrate 
outside the Park is an important component of IBMP activities.  
Developing and incorporating effective short- and long-term adaptive 
management strategies are essential to the success of the IBMP’s goals of 
bison management and reduction of the risk of brucellosis transmission.   
 
The United States Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) Animal and Plant 
Health Inspection Service (APHIS) established a national brucellosis 
program to safeguard the health of domestic livestock, maintain the 
economic viability of the U.S. cattle industry in national and international 
trade, protect public health, and ensure food safety.  The goal of the 
program is to eradicate brucellosis from the United States.  Through 
cooperative Federal-State-industry efforts, the United States has made 
significant progress since the program’s inception in 1934.  As of July 
2009, all 50 States achieved Class-Free State status (e.g., disease-free 
status) in cattle.  However, unique challenges impede final eradication.  
APHIS Veterinary Services (VS) recently developed a concept paper  
Text Len: 1726
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 efforts, the United States has made 
significant progress since the program’s inception in 1934.  As of July 
2009, all 50 States achieved Class-Free State status (e.g., disease-free 
status) in cattle.  However, unique challenges impede final eradication.  
APHIS Veterinary Services (VS) recently developed a concept paper  
                                                 
1
 USDOI National Park Service; USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service; USDA Forest 
Service [USFS]; Montana Department of Livestock; and Montana Fish, Wildlife and Parks.  
 1  
(74 Federal Register 51115-51116, October 5, 2009), describing a plan for 
the program that focuses on using a more adaptable science-based 
approach that is both effective and timely and that addresses the unique 
challenges.  One component of the plan that addresses the unique 
challenge posed by the presence of brucellosis in wildlife is to enhance 
efforts to mitigate disease transmission between wildlife and livestock.   
 
APHIS VS has partnered with wildlife agencies and other entities to 
develop risk mitigation strategies to prevent the further spread of 
brucellosis and to enhance efforts to eliminate B. abortus in the United 
States.  The IBMP partners work together, as outlined in the IBMP 
memorandum of understanding, to mitigate the risk of disease 
transmission by brucellosis-infected bison in the Greater Yellowstone 
Area (GYA).  Continued collaborations are needed to develop effective 
strategies to determine the location and range of bru
Text Len: 1535
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 in the United 
States.  The IBMP partners work together, as outlined in the IBMP 
memorandum of understanding, to mitigate the risk of disease 
transmission by brucellosis-infected bison in the Greater Yellowstone 
Area (GYA).  Continued collaborations are needed to develop effective 
strategies to determine the location and range of brucellosis-affected 
wildlife, reduce the prevalence of disease in wildlife, and mitigate the 
potential risks of disease transmission between wildlife and cattle.  
Potential strategies include partnering with State and Federal wildlife 
agencies to conduct wildlife surveillance in areas with brucellosis-affected 
livestock, supporting research to find tools (e.g., vaccination and 
contraceptives) and strategies (e.g., adaptive management) to reduce the 
prevalence of brucellosis in wildlife, and instituting those strategies as 
appropriate. 
 
USDA’s APHIS VS is interested in investigating the potential of venereal 
exposure as a mode of transmission of brucellosis by YNP bison bulls.  It 
is known that bison bulls shed Brucella in their semen (Robison et al., 
1998; Olsen et al., 1999).  However, the potential for transmission of 
brucellosis via the venereal route is not known.  We do know that 
brucellosis can be transmitted by direct contact with infected animals or 
within an environment that has been contaminated with discharges from 
infected animals.  In infected animals, seminal fluids, aborted fetuses, 
placental membranes or fluids and other vaginal discharges from post-
calving or abortion events may be contaminated with infectious Brucella 
organisms. 
 
Determining the potential for venereal
Text Len: 1666
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 animals or 
within an environment that has been contaminated with discharges from 
infected animals.  In infected animals, seminal fluids, aborted fetuses, 
placental membranes or fluids and other vaginal discharges from post-
calving or abortion events may be contaminated with infectious Brucella 
organisms. 
 
Determining the potential for venereal transmission of brucellosis by YNP 
bison bulls would assist in developing effective adaptive management 
strategies that could be included in IBMP operating procedures.  Under the 
current IBMP adaptive management strategy, allowing bison bulls access 
to public lands in Montana year-round is desired and will be evaluated as 
part of the expansion of bison habitat.  This expansion of habitat would 
put bison bulls in closer proximity and potentially increase the opportunity 
for commingling with cattle grazing in the area.  Understanding the 
potential for shedding of B. abortus in the semen of bison bulls is vital to 
assessing the appropriateness of this adaptive management strategy.  The 
 2  
proposed action, a proposed two-phase study described in more detail in 
the Proposed Action section (II.B.), would consist of temporarily 
immobilizing mature bison bulls in limited areas outside of the YNP and 
collecting their semen and blood samples for testing.  People other than 
those involved in this proposed study would not likely be present, and 
environmental impacts would be avoided or minimized. 
 
According to the APHIS’ National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) 
implementing procedures (7 CFR part 372), this proposed action is 
classified as one for which an environmental assessment (EA) is 
appropriate because it is part of the “Development of program plans that 
seek to
Text Len: 1755
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

environmental impacts would be avoided or minimized. 
 
According to the APHIS’ National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) 
implementing procedures (7 CFR part 372), this proposed action is 
classified as one for which an environmental assessment (EA) is 
appropriate because it is part of the “Development of program plans that 
seek to adopt strategies, methods, and techniques as the means of dealing 
with particular animal and plant health risks that may arise in the future,” 
is part of the “Implementation of program plans at the site-specific, action 
level,” and is “Research or testing that will be conducted outside of a 
laboratory or other containment area.” [7 CFR § 372.5(b)(1)(i), (ii) and 
(5)(i)].  Recognizing the substantial interest regarding brucellosis in bison 
in the YNP and bison management activities in the GYA, APHIS has 
prepared this EA.   
 
B. Purpose of and Need for the Proposed Action 
 
The purpose of the proposed action is to conduct a two-phase study to 
evaluate the potential shedding of Brucella abortus in the semen of bison 
bulls from the YNP and to assess the potential for venereal transmission of 
brucellosis by infected bison bulls.  The overall goal of the proposed two-
phase study is twofold:  1) to ascertain data and information essential to 
scientific and epidemiologically sound decision-making regarding bison 
management activities and adaptive management strategies such as habitat 
access, and 2) to facilitate the understanding of the potential role of 
brucellosis-infected bison bulls in venereal transmission of brucellosis
Text Len: 1591
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-
phase study is twofold:  1) to ascertain data and information essential to 
scientific and epidemiologically sound decision-making regarding bison 
management activities and adaptive management strategies such as habitat 
access, and 2) to facilitate the understanding of the potential role of 
brucellosis-infected bison bulls in venereal transmission of brucellosis.  
Evaluation of these issues would further efforts to improve the health of 
the wild, free-ranging bison population in the GYA and enhance the 
quality of the environment in the GYA.  Data and information garnered 
from this proposed study would be useful for efforts to reduce the 
potential risk of brucellosis transmission between bison and cattle while 
conserving the free-ranging nature of the YNP bison population. 
 
The need for Phase 1 of the proposed study is to collect samples to 
evaluate the semen from mature Yellowstone bison bulls for shedding of 
B. abortus, in order to determine if infective doses of B. abortus are shed 
in the semen, and to determine if semen quality is affected by B. abortus 
infection.  This information is needed to determine and implement 
appropriate strategies and adaptive management practices such as habitat 
expansion while assuring mitigation of the risk of disease transmission to 
cattle grazing in the area.  In addition, activities conducted in Phase 1 of 
 3  
the proposed study would provide for validation of the sample collection 
and evaluation procedures as the same collection and evaluation 
procedures would be used in Phase 2 of the proposed study. 
 
The need for Phase 2 of the proposed study is to assess the role of bison 
bulls in venereal transmission of brucellosis.  This assessment is needed to 
provide
Text Len: 1751
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 would provide for validation of the sample collection 
and evaluation procedures as the same collection and evaluation 
procedures would be used in Phase 2 of the proposed study. 
 
The need for Phase 2 of the proposed study is to assess the role of bison 
bulls in venereal transmission of brucellosis.  This assessment is needed to 
provide information essential to developing appropriate and effective 
disease management and elimination strategies.  Proposals to eliminate 
brucellosis from Yellowstone bison using nonlethal strategies currently 
focus on ways of eliminating the shedding of the disease organism by 
bison cows at calving (Miller, et al., 2004).  If venereal transmission by 
bison bulls contributes to the spread of brucellosis within the YNP bison 
population and possibly to cattle outside the YNP, further development 
and implementation of mitigation strategies that include bison bulls may 
be warranted.  Information garnered from this proposed study would be 
valuable to YNP’s bison vaccination strategy.  Conversely, if venereal 
transmission by bison bulls does not contribute to the spread of 
brucellosis, then resources and activities focused on limiting bison bull 
activities might not be warranted or could be modified to maximize risk 
mitigation activities. 
 
Overall, this proposed study would provide information regarding the 
shedding of Brucella by mature bison bulls and allow for the assessment 
of the potential risk of disease transmission between bison bulls and cattle 
in the same proximity.  The proposed study would help determine the 
level of shedding of Brucella during the non-rut season (Phase 1 of the 
proposed study) as compared to the rut season (Phase 2 of the proposed 
study).  Data would be
Text Len: 1759
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 the assessment 
of the potential risk of disease transmission between bison bulls and cattle 
in the same proximity.  The proposed study would help determine the 
level of shedding of Brucella during the non-rut season (Phase 1 of the 
proposed study) as compared to the rut season (Phase 2 of the proposed 
study).  Data would be garnered on the prevalence of shedding of Brucella 
by mature bison bulls from the YNP.  In addition, the proposed study 
would more specifically evaluate levels of shedding of Brucella and the 
subsequent impact on semen quality, viability, and infectivity.  This 
information would be useful for assessing the brucellosis status of the 
YNP bison breeding population.  Mitigating transmission of brucellosis 
within the YNP bison population would further the long-term goal of 
conserving a wild, disease-free, bison population which in turn would 
restore and enhance the quality of the environment. 
 II. Proposed Action and Alternatives 
 
A. No Action (the Current Situation)  
 
The No Action alternative would result in no proposed study.  The 
purpose of the proposed study is to better understand the potential risk for 
disease transmission by brucellosis-infected bison bulls from the YNP and 
assess the potential impact of this risk on adaptive management strategies.  
 4  
Without this proposed study, managers would continue to follow the 
current “no tolerance” strategy of bison bulls outside the Park during 
designated times of the year.  The “no tolerance” strategy is predicated on 
the assumption that brucellosis-infected bison bulls pose a risk of disease 
transmission.  Without this proposed study,
Text Len: 1658
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 this proposed study, managers would continue to follow the 
current “no tolerance” strategy of bison bulls outside the Park during 
designated times of the year.  The “no tolerance” strategy is predicated on 
the assumption that brucellosis-infected bison bulls pose a risk of disease 
transmission.  Without this proposed study, information to quantify and 
assess this potential risk of disease transmission would not be collected.  
Data and information to assess the potential for venereal transmission of 
disease by brucellosis-infected bison bulls would not be ascertained as 
well. 
 
B. Proposed Action 
 
The proposed action is a two-phase study designed to address shedding of 
B. abortus in the semen of bison bulls that have migrated out of the YNP 
in the winter and spring and to investigate the potential for venereal 
transmission of disease by brucellosis-infected bison bulls in the GYA.  
Each phase of the proposed study would be conducted under the 
appropriate permits for the study locations. 
 
Phase 1 of the proposed study would be conducted under a Montana Fish, 
Wildlife and Parks (MFWP) Research and Technical Services Animal 
Care and Use Committee permit with MFWP assistance.  MFWP has the 
jurisdiction to capture wildlife on the Forest Service (USFS) lands in 
Montana where Phase 1 of the proposed study would be conducted.  Phase 
1 would be conducted on USFS public lands in the IBMP Zone 2 area on 
the west side of the YNP, where IBMP bison management activities 
routinely occur each spring, and in the Eagle Creek/Bear Creek Special 
Management Area on the north side of
Text Len: 1614
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
Montana where Phase 1 of the proposed study would be conducted.  Phase 
1 would be conducted on USFS public lands in the IBMP Zone 2 area on 
the west side of the YNP, where IBMP bison management activities 
routinely occur each spring, and in the Eagle Creek/Bear Creek Special 
Management Area on the north side of the YNP, where bison are allowed 
year-round2.  Phase 1 would occur in April/May 2010 when bison bulls 
are normally present in the IBMP Zone 2 areas.  Field activities to 
accomplish Phase 1 of the proposed study would be conducted daily as 
bison bulls become available in the proposed study areas during the 
months of April and May until hazing of bison begins on or about May 15, 
2010.  The IBMP Zone 2 field locations used in Phase 1 of the proposed 
study would be accessed in accordance with Gallatin National Forest 
Service travel plans.  If migration of bison bulls out of the YNP in 
April/May 2010 to either location is limited in number, it may be 
necessary to conduct the proposed Phase 1 study activities again in 2011, 
perhaps as early as February 15, in order to collect the statistically 
determined number of samples needed.   
 
The location for Phase 2 of the proposed study has yet to be determined.  
Details of Phase 2 of the proposed study would be finalized based on the 
successful completion of Phase 1 of the proposed study.  Given that the 
                                                 
2
 For maps of these areas, see http
Text Len: 1480
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 on the 
successful completion of Phase 1 of the proposed study.  Given that the 
                                                 
2
 For maps of these areas, see http://ibmp.info/Library/2%20-%20State%20ROD3%20-%20Maps.pdf 
.  
 5  
goal of Phase 2 of the proposed study is to assess the potential for venereal 
transmission of disease by brucellosis-infected bison bulls, Phase 2 of the 
proposed study would be conducted during or as close as possible to the 
rut season in September/October 2012.  Once a location is determined for 
Phase 2 of the proposed study, this EA would be supplemented to reflect a 
NEPA review of applicable issues. 
 
A statistical analysis determined that samples from 50 individual bison 
bulls would be needed for each Phase of the proposed study.  This analysis 
is based on the assumption that the population of bison bulls in the YNP is 
approximately 1,500 and that 20% of the seropositive bison bulls in the 
YNP would be shedding B. abortus in their semen.  This sample size 
assures a 99% confidence of finding at least one bull shedding B. abortus 
and provides for adequate evaluation of semen quality. 
 
The proposed study would include the following activities: 
 Temporarily immobilizing the bison bulls, 
 Collecting blood and semen samples from them, and 
 Testing and evaluating those blood and semen samples. 
 
Capture
Text Len: 1374
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 one bull shedding B. abortus 
and provides for adequate evaluation of semen quality. 
 
The proposed study would include the following activities: 
 Temporarily immobilizing the bison bulls, 
 Collecting blood and semen samples from them, and 
 Testing and evaluating those blood and semen samples. 
 
Capture and temporary immobilization of the bison bulls would be 
accomplished using established safe chemical immobilization and 
recovery techniques for bison to ensure the health and safety of the bison 
and study personnel.  Veterinary oversight for animal care and handling, 
immobilization, and sample collection would be provided during the 
proposed study activities.  Wildlife biologists trained and experienced in 
the capture and handling of bison would also be participating in the 
proposed study activities.  Chemical immobilization would be 
administered via darting from the ground by qualified individuals.  It is 
expected that the bison would be chemically immobilized and restrained 
for no more than 20 minutes and would be appropriately monitored 
throughout this time.  After the study samples are collected and the 
identification tags applied, the chemical immobilization would be reversed 
and the bison would be observed to assure a full recovery.   
 
Collection of blood and semen samples and application of identification 
tags would be performed by the veterinarians and wildlife biologists.  
Blood samples would be collected using safe venipuncture techniques, and 
semen samples would be obtained using established standard bull semen 
collection techniques.  Each bison bull would be fitted with an eartag and 
marked with a non-permanent visual marker.  The eartag would identify 
the animal as having received a controlled substance and would provide a 
phone number to call should
Text Len: 1824
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 using safe venipuncture techniques, and 
semen samples would be obtained using established standard bull semen 
collection techniques.  Each bison bull would be fitted with an eartag and 
marked with a non-permanent visual marker.  The eartag would identify 
the animal as having received a controlled substance and would provide a 
phone number to call should the animal be harvested during a native hunt 
or the Montana bison hunting season.  The same techniques for sample 
collection would be used in both Phases of the proposed study. 
 
 6  
Testing and evaluation of the blood samples collected from the bison bulls 
in this proposed study would be performed in the laboratory.  The semen 
samples collected from the bison bulls in this proposed study would be 
evaluated in the field for semen quality and sent to the laboratory for 
additional testing. 
 
C. Other Possible Alternatives to Proposed Action 
 
APHIS is exploring and considering potential feasible locations for Phase 
2 of the proposed study.  APHIS is open to partnering with appropriate 
land and wildlife management agencies to conduct Phase 2 of the 
proposed study; however, no agreements are in place at this time. 
 
D. Other Alternatives Considered but Dismissed 
 from Further Consideration 
 
APHIS VS considered the alternative of conducting Phase 1 of the 
proposed study in conjunction with other bison management activities.  
One such activity might be if and when bison bulls are captured during 
IBMP activities related to testing and shipping to slaughter.  However, 
capturing, testing, and shipping bison to slaughter varies from year to year.  
The numbers of bison bulls available during the aforementioned bison 
management activities could be limited and might not provide
Text Len: 1772
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 activities.  
One such activity might be if and when bison bulls are captured during 
IBMP activities related to testing and shipping to slaughter.  However, 
capturing, testing, and shipping bison to slaughter varies from year to year.  
The numbers of bison bulls available during the aforementioned bison 
management activities could be limited and might not provide for the 
statistically determined number of samples needed for the proposed study.  
In addition, bison bulls of the age group needed for this proposed study are 
not easily handled in the trapping facilities and pose a greater safety risk 
both to proposed study personnel and to the bison bulls themselves.  
Capture activities occur at a time of year when the bison bulls are further 
from their rut, thus precluding their use in Phase 2 of the proposed study.  
Therefore, this alternative has been dismissed from further consideration. 
 
APHIS VS also considered the alternative to conduct Phase 1 of the 
proposed study during other times of the year.  This alternative was 
dismissed from further consideration because bison bulls are not tolerated 
outside the YNP during other times of the year.  
 
 
III. Potential Environmental Impacts 
 
The NEPA implementing regulations provide criteria that Federal agencies 
should evaluate, if applicable, in environmental documents for proposed 
actions.  This section of the EA addresses the applicable criteria related to 
potential impacts from the No Action alternative and from the proposed 
action.  NEPA criteria that are applicable for consideration in this section 
 7  
of the document include animal impacts, human health and safety, and the 
physical environment.  
 
A. No Action 
 
Without the proposed action, efforts to gather scientific information to 
better understand the potential
Text Len: 1825
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 from the No Action alternative and from the proposed 
action.  NEPA criteria that are applicable for consideration in this section 
 7  
of the document include animal impacts, human health and safety, and the 
physical environment.  
 
A. No Action 
 
Without the proposed action, efforts to gather scientific information to 
better understand the potential risk for disease transmission by brucellosis-
infected bison bulls in the GYA would be hindered.  The opportunity to 
further evaluate the merits of adaptive management strategies which 
currently limit bison habitat in order to mitigate the risk of disease 
transmission to cattle would be lost, as would be the consideration of 
expanding bison habitat.  Without the proposed action to assist in 
developing strategies to effectively control and eliminate brucellosis, the 
disease may continue to spread within the wild, free-ranging bison 
population in the GYA.   
 
B. Proposed Action 
 
Brucellosis is a serious disease of livestock and wildlife that has 
significant animal health, public health, and international trade 
consequences.  Brucellosis is a contagious disease, caused by bacteria of 
the genus Brucella, which affects both animals and humans.  Brucella 
abortus mainly affects cattle, bison, and swine; however, other species of 
animals and humans are susceptible as well.  In cattle and bison, the 
disease localizes in the lymph nodes and in the reproductive organs and/or 
the udder, causing spontaneous abortions in dams or birth of weak 
offspring, as well as systemic effects in both males and females.  
Infertility, decreased milk production, weight loss, and lameness may also 
be associated with
Text Len: 1687
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 cattle and bison, the 
disease localizes in the lymph nodes and in the reproductive organs and/or 
the udder, causing spontaneous abortions in dams or birth of weak 
offspring, as well as systemic effects in both males and females.  
Infertility, decreased milk production, weight loss, and lameness may also 
be associated with brucellosis infection.  There is no effective means of 
treating brucellosis in livestock and wildlife.  In humans, brucellosis, often 
called undulant fever, causes generalized musculoskeletal malaise, flu-like 
symptoms, and pain and fatigue.  The symptoms can last for years and 
may develop into a variety of chronic conditions.  Humans can be treated 
for brucellosis with a rigorous course of antibiotic therapy. 
 
1. Animal Impacts   
 
a. Bison Bulls 
 
The proposed study involves temporarily immobilizing and restraining 
bison bulls.  The objective for the immobilization and handling of the 
individual bison is to collect semen and blood samples to determine the 
brucellosis status of the animal and to evaluate the possible shedding of   
B. abortus in the semen of infected bulls.  This information will be used to 
consider expansion of bison habitat outside the YNP and to assess the 
potential for venereal transmission of brucellosis by bison bulls.   
 8  
Ensuring humane handling and treatment of the bison bulls during the 
proposed study activities is a priority.  The activities would be conducted 
as quickly and efficiently as possible and in a manner that would prevent 
undue stress, trauma, injury, or any unnecessary discomfort to the animal.   
Bison bulls would
Text Len: 1626
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.   
 8  
Ensuring humane handling and treatment of the bison bulls during the 
proposed study activities is a priority.  The activities would be conducted 
as quickly and efficiently as possible and in a manner that would prevent 
undue stress, trauma, injury, or any unnecessary discomfort to the animal.   
Bison bulls would be immobilized only at locations that are safe for the 
bison and the proposed study personnel.  Veterinary oversight for animal 
care and handling, immobilization, and sample collection would be 
provided during the proposed study activities.  Wildlife biologists trained 
and experienced in the capture and handling of bison would also be 
participating in the proposed study activities.  
 
The bison bulls would be temporarily immobilized via darting from the 
ground, using the standard administration protocol of FDA-approved 
anesthetic and analgesic drugs conventionally used in wildlife 
management activities.  Blood samples would be collected via 
venipuncture technique, and semen samples would be obtained using 
established standard bull semen collection techniques.  Once the proposed 
study samples were collected, the chemical immobilization drug would be 
reversed, allowing each animal to recover within minutes of 
administration.   
 
Given the analgesic nature of the chemical immobilization compounds, it 
is anticipated that the bison bulls would not experience negative impacts 
during the collection of study samples.  It is expected that they would be 
immobilized and restrained for no more than 20 minutes.  Their vital signs 
would be monitored throughout the sampling procedures and initial 
recovery phase.  Every precaution would be taken to prevent 
immobilization and handling-related trauma, injuries, or death to the 
bison.  The standard chemical immobilization protocol that would
Text Len: 1847
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 expected that they would be 
immobilized and restrained for no more than 20 minutes.  Their vital signs 
would be monitored throughout the sampling procedures and initial 
recovery phase.  Every precaution would be taken to prevent 
immobilization and handling-related trauma, injuries, or death to the 
bison.  The standard chemical immobilization protocol that would be used 
in this proposed study does not have long-term physical or physiological 
effects.  The bison bulls would be observed for as long as they are visible 
after recovery.  No harmful or negative impacts to the bison bulls are 
expected due to the proposed action.  
 
b. Non-Target Species 
 
Some non-target species may be temporarily impacted while activities 
associated with this proposed study are occurring.  However, the proposed 
study activities would occur for brief periods of time only on days when 
bison bulls are present in the proposed study area.  The temporary impacts 
that might occur to non-target species during the proposed study activities 
are the same in nature as temporary impacts associated with IBMP 
activities and were analyzed in the “Bison Management Plan 
Environmental Imapct Statement” (BMP EIS) (USDOI and USDA, 2000).  
These types of activities were determined to be not likely to adversely 
affect non-target species.   
 9  
 
Immobilized bison bulls would be monitored as they return to their 
environment.  If circumstances should indicate the need to euthanize a 
bison bull that has been chemically immobilized as part of the proposed 
study activities, the carcass would be removed and incinerated or buried in 
a secure landfill.  Therefore, chemical immobilization of bison bulls is not 

Text Len: 1712
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 bison bulls would be monitored as they return to their 
environment.  If circumstances should indicate the need to euthanize a 
bison bull that has been chemically immobilized as part of the proposed 
study activities, the carcass would be removed and incinerated or buried in 
a secure landfill.  Therefore, chemical immobilization of bison bulls is not 
likely to adversely affect non-target species, including predators and 
scavengers.   
 
2. Human Health and Safety  
 
a. The General Public 
 
Brucellosis is a zoonotic disease that can infect people, causing undulant 
fever.  Symptoms include intermittent fever, chills, night sweats, body and 
joint pain, poor appetite, and weakness.  The general public would be at no 
risk of contracting the disease from bison as a result of the study activities.  
 
b. Hunters  
 
Generally, hunting does not occur during the time of year that Phase 1 of 
the study is planned.  However, U.S. treaties with some Native American 
groups allow hunting without restrictions for time of year and number of 
bison taken.  Phase 1 study activities would be carried out in areas where 
Native American groups could hunt according to treaties.  If hunting 
activities by these groups are still occurring during the study timeframe, 
APHIS would ensure communications with Native American group 
officials about the study activities on mature bison bulls.  In addition, 
APHIS would fit the study bulls with eartags, identifying them as having 
been administered controlled substances.  A 45-day withdrawal period is 
required after use of the drugs before the bison meat could be consumed.  
Should one of the study bison be harvested,
Text Len: 1677
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

officials about the study activities on mature bison bulls.  In addition, 
APHIS would fit the study bulls with eartags, identifying them as having 
been administered controlled substances.  A 45-day withdrawal period is 
required after use of the drugs before the bison meat could be consumed.  
Should one of the study bison be harvested, the eartag would provide a 
telephone number for the hunter to call for information to determine when 
the animal was administered the drugs. 
 
c. Other Potential Land Users   
 
During the time and in the Zone 2 locations proposed for the study, USFS 
does not allow recreational activities on USFS land because of IBMP 
operational activities.  Therefore, no change in impacts would occur to 
land use by recreationists during this time of year as a result of the study 
activities.  
 
 
 
 
 
 10  
d. Worker Safety/Occupational Safety 
 
The study team would follow a protocol that includes operational safety 
considerations for ensuring the health and safety of the team members.  At 
least one cell phone would be available for all communications outside of 
the team.  Study personnel would notify USFS authorities in advance of 
any planned bison capture and immobilization activities.  
 
Bison would be captured in locations that are safe for both bison and the 
study team members.  One person on the team would be responsible for 
monitoring other nearby bison to alert the team of any dangerous behavior.  
As grizzly bears are known to frequent the proposed study areas and could  
be active during Phase 1 of the study, the study team would be alert for 
bears in the area and would carry bear spray at
Text Len: 1662
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
study team members.  One person on the team would be responsible for 
monitoring other nearby bison to alert the team of any dangerous behavior.  
As grizzly bears are known to frequent the proposed study areas and could  
be active during Phase 1 of the study, the study team would be alert for 
bears in the area and would carry bear spray at all times.   
 
As it is unknown as to whether the bison bulls may be infected with 
brucellosis, all personnel handling bison would wear protective gloves and 
take precautions to prevent direct contact with fluid samples drawn.  The 
study team would also carry disinfectant to thoroughly clean/wash if 
needed. 
 
Personnel who would be involved in the study activities have a variety of 
expertise and experience needed to carry out the study activities, including 
wildlife chemical immobilization using darting technique, proficiency in 
darting, veterinary care, animal restraint, tagging and marking animals, 
sample collection, and bison bull reproductive evaluation.   
 
In the event of human exposure to the immobilization drugs, syringes with 
appropriate levels of a reversal drug would be drawn up and available.  
Drugs used for the study would be stored in a safe or lockable device in 
transit and reversal drugs would be available during the study activities in 
the field.  First aid kits would be available at all times.   
 
3. Vegetation and Physical Environment  
 
This section of the EA considers the potential impacts on components of 
the physical environment, specifically vegetation, soil, and water.  
 
a. Vegetation and Soil 
 
The time of year the study activities would occur is the early to mid-spring 
season when
Text Len: 1695
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   
 
3. Vegetation and Physical Environment  
 
This section of the EA considers the potential impacts on components of 
the physical environment, specifically vegetation, soil, and water.  
 
a. Vegetation and Soil 
 
The time of year the study activities would occur is the early to mid-spring 
season when snow cover is possible.  Activities under the proposed study 
that could impact vegetation and soil include physical access to USFS 
land.  Other study activities, such as darting and drawing fluid samples, 
are not likely to impact the physical environment.   
 
 11  
APHIS, VS would be accessing USFS land in compliance with Gallatin 
National Forest Travel Plans for access.  A combination of snow 
machines, horses, vehicles and travel by foot would be used to access 
Zone 2, as allowed according to the Travel Plans. In following the Travel 
Plans, minimal disturbance to vegetation and soil on the ground surface 
would occur from land access.  
 
The use of darts to temporarily immobilize the bison bulls is not likely to 
result in impacts to ground cover, vegetation, or soil.  Although it is 
possible that a dart might not complete intramuscular penetration of the 
bull or could miss the intended target, the study personnel doing the 
darting would be sufficiently knowledgeable to handle the situation.  If a 
dart were to miss the intended target, study team members would make 
every effort to recover the dart.  Darts would be made to be easily 
identifiable.  In the event a lost dart is not recovered, the study team would 
document this occurrence and notify USFS with information relative to the 
occurrence.   
 
One scenario
Text Len: 1660
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

dart were to miss the intended target, study team members would make 
every effort to recover the dart.  Darts would be made to be easily 
identifiable.  In the event a lost dart is not recovered, the study team would 
document this occurrence and notify USFS with information relative to the 
occurrence.   
 
One scenario considered is the dart imploding upon impact on the bison 
bull and, for some reason, not successfully penetrating the animal and then 
falling onto the ground.  Under this scenario, the anesthesia mixture (10 
milligrams) would adsorb quickly into the snow (and then be diluted) or 
into the soil (and then be adsorbed).  Since the amount of the drug would 
be minute and would not be available for ingestion by wildlife (because of 
being diluted into the snow and/or adsorbing into the soil), there would be 
negligible impact on the environment.  
 
b. Water 
 
Bison would be captured in locations that are safe for both bison and staff.  
Unsafe locations may include waterways, roads or other obstacles that 
interfere with the immobilization of bison.  The study activities would not 
directly impact water because they would be carried out on ground surface 
away from water resources.  The types of activities involved would have 
minimal, if any, impact to nearby water resources.   
 
c. Recreational and Cultural Land Uses 
 
(1) Recreational Land Use  
 
During the timeframe and location for the proposed study activities, 
recreational activities are restricted because of IBMP operational activities 
that occur in Zone 2 at that time of year.  Therefore, no change would 
occur to land
Text Len: 1628
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   
 
c. Recreational and Cultural Land Uses 
 
(1) Recreational Land Use  
 
During the timeframe and location for the proposed study activities, 
recreational activities are restricted because of IBMP operational activities 
that occur in Zone 2 at that time of year.  Therefore, no change would 
occur to land use by recreationists during this time of year as a result of 
the study activities.  Prior to carrying out the study activities, APHIS, VS 
would communicate its intentions with USFS and public agencies that 
 12  
carry out IBMP operational activities.  APHIS would continue to 
communicate with these public agencies during the study timeframe in 
order to ensure that the study activities do not conflict with or impede 
IBMP activities.  
 
(2) Native American Hunting Rights 
  
Three Native American groups (the Nez Perce Tribe, the Confederated 
Salish and Kootenai Tribes, and the Shoshone-Bannock Tribes) have 
reserved hunting rights in the public lands designated as Zone 2 in the 
IBMP.  These USFS lands are termed “unoccupied lands of the United 
States” in the treaties with these Native American groups.  The timing and 
study area of Phase 1 activities may coincide with the hunting activities of 
at least one of these tribes.  If Native American hunters are still hunting in 
the study area at the time for Phase 1 study activities to begin, APHIS 
would brief the tribal hunting authorities about the APHIS study activities 
prior to starting them.  The briefing would include information about the 
study protocol, the drugs that would be used for temporary 
immobilization, drug withdrawal times, and the marking
Text Len: 1648
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 are still hunting in 
the study area at the time for Phase 1 study activities to begin, APHIS 
would brief the tribal hunting authorities about the APHIS study activities 
prior to starting them.  The briefing would include information about the 
study protocol, the drugs that would be used for temporary 
immobilization, drug withdrawal times, and the marking of immobilized 
bison bulls. 
 
IV. Other Environmental Review  Requirements  
A. Endangered or Threatened Species 
 
Section 7 of the Endangered Species Act (ESA) and ESA’s implementing 
regulations require Federal agencies to ensure that their actions are not 
likely to jeopardize the continued existence of endangered or threatened 
species or result in the destruction or adverse modification of critical 
habitat.  Therefore, the following section discusses the effect of the 
proposed action and No Action alternatives on federally listed threatened 
and endangered species in Gallatin and Park Counties in Montana. 
Three federally listed threatened species occur in Gallatin County:  Ute 
ladies’ tresses (Spiranthes diluvialis), grizzly bear (Ursus arctos 
horribilis), and Canada lynx (Lynx canadensis) and its designated critical 
habitat.  Only the grizzly bear and the Canada lynx and its critical habitat 
occur in Park County.  APHIS has determined that the proposed bison bull 
semen study would have no effect on these species or designated critical 
habitat for the following reasons: 
In Montana, Ute ladies’-tresses are found in the Middle Rockies-Blue 
Mountains ecoregion (Fertig et al., 2005).  The proposed study area does 
not occur in this e
Text Len: 1631
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 proposed bison bull 
semen study would have no effect on these species or designated critical 
habitat for the following reasons: 
In Montana, Ute ladies’-tresses are found in the Middle Rockies-Blue 
Mountains ecoregion (Fertig et al., 2005).  The proposed study area does 
not occur in this ecoregion.   
 13  
Grizzly bears and Canada lynx may occur in the study area, but are 
unlikely to be found in the open rangeland area where capture and 
temporary immobilization of bison bulls would occur.   
 
Primary constituent elements of Canada lynx critical habitat include boreal 
forest landscapes supporting a mosaic of differing successional forest 
stages and containing snowshoe hares, sites for denning, and other habitat 
that lynx may travel through to access boreal forest (USDOI, 2009).  The 
temporary activities of capture and immobilization would have no effect 
on this habitat and would only occur in open rangeland that would be used 
to access preferred sites.   
 
B.  Bald Eagle and Gold en Eagle Protection Act  
 
Although no longer a federally listed endangered or threatened species in 
most areas of the United States, including Montana, the bald eagle is 
protected by the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act and the Migratory 
Bird Treaty Act.  Bald eagles are sensitive to human activities, such as 
recreational activities and resource and urban development.  Although 
bald eagles are sensitive to human activities, they do appear to acclimate 
to some activities occurring at predictable frequencies, intensities, and 
time limits.  In Montana and Wyoming, nest building starts in January and 

Text Len: 1628
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Act.  Bald eagles are sensitive to human activities, such as 
recreational activities and resource and urban development.  Although 
bald eagles are sensitive to human activities, they do appear to acclimate 
to some activities occurring at predictable frequencies, intensities, and 
time limits.  In Montana and Wyoming, nest building starts in January and 
fledging of young ends in July.  Early in the season with nest building and 
egg laying, they are most sensitive to human activity.  Depending on the 
type of activity, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) guidelines 
recommend buffers for different activities.  The buffers generally 
suggested for eagles include a 330-foot buffer from nests during the 
breeding season from any activities.  There have historically been bald 
eagle nests in Zone 2 areas.  Prior to initiating sample collections APHIS 
would confer with USFS to ensure that study activities do not interfere 
with bald eagles in proposed study areas. 
 
C. Historic and Cultural Resources 
 
The activities described as the proposed action in this EA are within the 
range of activities that were considered in the BMP, the IBMP supporting 
analysis.  The proposed action is a research study that is associated with 
adaptive management actions under the IBMP.  The types of activities 
associated with the study would not affect historic sites.  Because the 
proposed action would occur on USFS lands, APHIS confirmed with 
USFS that the proposed action presents no concerns and no effects to 
historic and cultural resources.   
 
The BMP EIS addresses the importance of bison, including their 
importance to the cultural landscapes and visual resources of the GYA.  
 14  
Bison are a
Text Len: 1716
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 occur on USFS lands, APHIS confirmed with 
USFS that the proposed action presents no concerns and no effects to 
historic and cultural resources.   
 
The BMP EIS addresses the importance of bison, including their 
importance to the cultural landscapes and visual resources of the GYA.  
 14  
Bison are a cultural resource to many, including Native American tribes, 
GYA residents, the American viewing public, and public agencies.   
 
During bison management activities carried out by public agencies in 
accordance with the BMP EIS, bison may be marked using a variety of 
techniques, including ear tags, paper backtags, paint, peroxide, hair dye 
stripes, and clipped hair.  Marking techniques vary by public agency, the 
purpose, and location.  Markings during bison management activities 
serve a purpose, e.g., to prevent testing a bison multiple times or to 
indicate that a bison has tested negative for the Brucella organism.  Some 
marking techniques are visible from 100 yards or farther.  Some markings 
are temporary, such as those made with paint, and their duration can 
depend on the weather conditions.  Temporary markings are often visible 
until the bison shed their winter fur in the spring.  Although tags used to 
identify bison during management activities are visually intrusive, they are 
necessary to minimize the need to capture and handle the bison more than 
once to determine its brucellosis status.  The BMP EIS addresses marking 
and other bison identification techniques as actions that alter the historic 
image of the bison and that would have a temporary, moderate impact on 
the historic landscapes of the GYA.  The use of a non
Text Len: 1668
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
necessary to minimize the need to capture and handle the bison more than 
once to determine its brucellosis status.  The BMP EIS addresses marking 
and other bison identification techniques as actions that alter the historic 
image of the bison and that would have a temporary, moderate impact on 
the historic landscapes of the GYA.  The use of a non-permanent visual 
marker and an ear tag during the proposed study activities would impact 
bison in the same way. 
 
Some activities associated with the proposed study, such as identifying a 
bison with an ear tag and a non-permanent visual marker, are important 
for the study but would impact the bison in an aesthetic manner.  Using 
markers on bison bulls from the proposed study also serves the purpose of 
identifying the bison for potential hunters, such as Native Americans who 
have treaty rights to hunt during the study time period, who might 
otherwise harvest and consume meat from a darted bison.  Although these 
actions are not physically harmful to the bison, they may be temporarily 
visually unappealing to the public.   
 
 
V. Cumulative Impacts 
 
This EA examines the activities associated with a proposed study to assess 
the shedding and potential for venereal transmission of B. abortus by 
bison bulls in the GYA.  Activities associated with the proposed study are 
not expected to result in adverse cumulative effects. 
 
Since Phase 1 of the proposed study would occur during the same time of 
year as other IBMP activities, there could be a temporary secondary 
impact to these activities.  However, the study group and IBMP partners 
would be communicating with one another throughout this time regarding 
on-going activities. 
Text Len: 1710
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

not expected to result in adverse cumulative effects. 
 
Since Phase 1 of the proposed study would occur during the same time of 
year as other IBMP activities, there could be a temporary secondary 
impact to these activities.  However, the study group and IBMP partners 
would be communicating with one another throughout this time regarding 
on-going activities.  Spatial separation would be maintained should any 
 15  
proposed study and IBMP activities occur simultaneously.  In addition, 
based on previous field studies of bison involving immobilization, it is 
anticipated that bison bulls may become sensitive to capture disturbance 
and wary of the proposed study activities, thus avoiding these areas.  
However, the study is of short duration; therefore, if this impact occurs, it 
should also be short-lived.    
 
One of the goals of the IBMP is to manage temporal and spatial separation 
of bison and cattle to mitigate potential transmission of brucellosis.  
Currently, this is accomplished through hazing, capture, test and slaughter 
of sero-positive animals and vaccination of sero-negative animals, and a 
limited hunt in Montana.  The proposed study may provide important 
information that would allow for re-evaluation and re-consideration of 
some of the current IBMP activities.  This may result in impacts to future 
decision-making regarding protocols for bison habitat management, bison 
vaccination strategies, and the bison hunt activities.  IBMP activities that 
could be impacted include strategies to maintain appropriate bison 
population and distribution should bison habitat be expanded. 
 
 
VI. Agencies or Persons Contacted 
 
U.S. Forest Service, Gallatin National Forest 
 
Montana Fish, Wildlife
Text Len: 1738
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
vaccination strategies, and the bison hunt activities.  IBMP activities that 
could be impacted include strategies to maintain appropriate bison 
population and distribution should bison habitat be expanded. 
 
 
VI. Agencies or Persons Contacted 
 
U.S. Forest Service, Gallatin National Forest 
 
Montana Fish, Wildlife and Parks 
 
USDA, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Veterinary Services 
 
USDA, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Policy and Program 
Development, Environmental and Risk Analysis Services 
 
 
VII. References 
 
Cheville, N.F., McCullough, D.R., and Paulson, L.R., 1998.  Brucellosis 
in the Greater Yellowstone Area.  National Research Council.  National 
Academy Press.  Washington, D.C.  186pp. 
 
Fertig, W., Black, R., and Wolken, P., 2005.  Range wide status review of 
Ute ladies’-tresses (Spiranthes diluvialis).  Prepared for the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service and Central Utah Water Conservancy District.  
30 September 2005.  101 pp. 
 
Meyer, M.E., and Meagher, M., 1995.  Brucellosis in free-ranging bison 
(Bison bison) in Yellowstone, Grand Teton, and Wood Buffalo National 
 16  
 17  
Parks: A review.  (letter to the editor)  Journal of Wildlife Diseases.  
31:579-598. 
 
Miller, L.A., Rhyan, J., and Drew, M., 2004.  Contraception of bison by 

Text Len: 1311
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Yellowstone, Grand Teton, and Wood Buffalo National 
 16  
 17  
Parks: A review.  (letter to the editor)  Journal of Wildlife Diseases.  
31:579-598. 
 
Miller, L.A., Rhyan, J., and Drew, M., 2004.  Contraception of bison by 
GnRH Vaccine:  A possible means of decreasing transmission of 
brucellosis in bison.  Journal of Wildlife Diseases. 40:725-30. 
 
Olsen, S.C., Rhyan, J., Gidlewski, T., and Palmer, M.V., 1999. Biosafety 
and antibody responses following vaccination of adult bison bulls with 
Brucella abortus strain RB51. American Journal of Veterinary Research. 
60: 905-908. 
 
Robison, C.D., Davis, D.S., Templeton, J.W., Westhusin, M., Foxworth, 
W.B., Gilsdorf, M.J., and Adams, L.G., 1998. Conservation of germ plasm 
from bison infected with Brucella abortus. Journal of Wildlife Diseases 
34: 582-589. 
 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Animal and Plant Health Inspection 
Service, 2009.  Notice of availability of a bovine brucellosis program 
concept paper [Docket No. APHIS-2009-0006]. 74 FR 191:51115-51116, 
October 5.  
 
United States Department of the Interior. 2009.  Endangered and 
Threatened Wildlife and Plants:  Revised Designation of  
Critical Habitat for the Contiguous United States Distinct Population  

Text Len: 1243
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 paper [Docket No. APHIS-2009-0006]. 74 FR 191:51115-51116, 
October 5.  
 
United States Department of the Interior. 2009.  Endangered and 
Threatened Wildlife and Plants:  Revised Designation of  
Critical Habitat for the Contiguous United States Distinct Population  
Segment of the Canada Lynx. Federal Register, Vol. 74, p. 8615-8702, 
February 25, 2009. 
 
U.S. Department of the Interior and U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2000.  
Final Environmental Impact Statement for the Interagency Bison 
Management Plan for the State of Montana and Yellowstone National 
Park.  August 2000.   
 
USDOI and USDA 2000—See U.S. Department of the Interior and U.S. 
Department of Agriculture. 
 
Text Len: 690
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
