 
 1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE) 
Ongoing Surveillance Plan 
 
July 20, 2006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy Ongoing Surveillance Plan  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) has taken aggressive measures to prevent 
the introduction and potential spread of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), and 
has conducted surveillance since 1990 to monitor whether the disease was present.  
Surveillance was expanded in scope and intensity following the confirmation of BSE in 
an imported cow in December 2003.  This expanded surveillance effort was designed to 
estimate the level of disease present in the United States and provide input for designing 
a long-term surveillance plan.  
 
The present plan is intended to inform and educate USDA’s partners and stakeholders on 
approaches to be employed in ongoing BSE surveillance.  The plan retains the USDA’s 
ability to detect BSE at 1 infected animal per 1,000,000 adult cattle in the population with 
a high degree of confidence, maintains surveillance at levels that exceed international 
standards, emphasizes sample collection from cattle subpopulations where BSE is most 
likely to be detected, and retains sample collections from all important surveillance 
sources. 
 
The plan follows surveillance system design standards and guidelines established by the 
USDA’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), Veterinary Services (VS), 
National Surveillance Unit (NSU).  These guidelines are intended
Text Len: 1551
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 subpopulations where BSE is most 
likely to be detected, and retains sample collections from all important surveillance 
sources. 
 
The plan follows surveillance system design standards and guidelines established by the 
USDA’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), Veterinary Services (VS), 
National Surveillance Unit (NSU).  These guidelines are intended to assist planners and 
managers in considering specific objectives, design strategies, reporting systems, 
implementation methods, and long-term system maintenance.  The guidelines ensure that 
the objectives of the surveillance system are predefined, and that the collection, 
organization, and analysis of appropriate data are considered before implementation.  
Further, the guidelines provide a mechanism for review and evaluation to assure that the 
surveillance is providing the appropriate type and quality of information. 
 
Disease description 
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy, commonly known as “Mad Cow Disease”, is a 
transmissible neurodegenerative disease of adult cattle that emerged in Great Britain in 
1985,38 and has subsequently been identified in cattle of most European countries, 
Canada, the United States, and Japan.  BSE belongs to the group of transmissible 
spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs), together with scrapie of sheep, chronic wasting 
disease of free-ranging and captive deer and elk, and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) of 
humans.  TSEs have long latency periods, are untreatable, and currently cannot be 
prevented by vaccination since there is absence of a host immune response to infection.   
 
Most scientific evidence suggests that prions are the causative agent of TSEs;32  however, 
the nature of the prion
Text Len: 1728
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CJD) of 
humans.  TSEs have long latency periods, are untreatable, and currently cannot be 
prevented by vaccination since there is absence of a host immune response to infection.   
 
Most scientific evidence suggests that prions are the causative agent of TSEs;32  however, 
the nature of the prion remains undetermined.  A unique characteristic of the prion is its 
resistance to inactivation by most conventional physical or chemical decontamination 
methods.37  The prion consists mostly of protein, largely comprised by a proteinase-
resistant, disease-associated isoform (PrPres) of host-encoded prion protein (PrPC).29,32  
The pathogenesis of the TSEs requires the formation of PrPres from PrPC.16  Interaction 
 
 3
with PrPres leads to post-translational conformational modification of PrPC,24,26,33 resulting 
in its conversion to PrPres.14,19  The subsequent pathological accumulation of PrPres in 
certain tissues defines the TSEs.13,34 The pathogenesis of BSE appears to involve a much 
more restricted tissue distribution of PrPres accumulation than other animal TSEs, having 
reduced involvement of the lymphoreticular system.   
 
The origin of the BSE agent is unresolved. Theories have considered derivation from a 
TSE agent of another mammalian species, such as scrapie,40 or spontaneous genetic 
mutation of the bovid prion protein gene.31  The emergence of BSE coincided with 
reduced use of hydrocarbon solvents in the production of meat-and-bone meal (MBM) 
through carcass rendering.40 
 
Transmission of BSE is thought to primarily
Text Len: 1559
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 species, such as scrapie,40 or spontaneous genetic 
mutation of the bovid prion protein gene.31  The emergence of BSE coincided with 
reduced use of hydrocarbon solvents in the production of meat-and-bone meal (MBM) 
through carcass rendering.40 
 
Transmission of BSE is thought to primarily occur through ingestion of feedstuff, 
especially ruminant-derived MBM, contaminated with the BSE agent.41,43  Calves born to 
infected cows have increased risk to develop BSE,44 especially if born around the time of 
disease onset in the dam.22  However, the risk is probably influenced by conserved 
management practices where both the dam and calf have been fed concentrated feedstuff 
containing MBM early in life.12  Horizontal transmission of BSE between cattle is not 
believed to occur.  Most cattle become infected within the first 6 months of life.12  The 
mean incubation period for BSE is around 60 months, with clinical onset of disease 
occurring on average at 4-5 years of age.11  The age range of affected animals is very 
wide, although BSE is rarely confirmed in animals less than 30 months of age.4,48   
 
BSE is invariably fatal.  Clinical signs have an insidious onset and are largely 
nonspecific.  Signs that may be associated with BSE include apprehension, ataxia, 
emaciation, hypersensitivity to touch or sound, head shyness, panic-stricken response, 
kicking in the milking parlor, reluctance to enter the milking parlor, abnormal ear 
movement or carriage, increased alertness behavior, reduced milk yield, bruxism, and 
change in temperament.35,
Text Len: 1569
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 apprehension, ataxia, 
emaciation, hypersensitivity to touch or sound, head shyness, panic-stricken response, 
kicking in the milking parlor, reluctance to enter the milking parlor, abnormal ear 
movement or carriage, increased alertness behavior, reduced milk yield, bruxism, and 
change in temperament.35,43  The duration of clinical signs averages 1 to 2 months prior to 
death or slaughter, but may range from weeks to a year.43 
 
Although live animal tests are under development, at present, none are available to 
reliably detect BSE.  Diagnosis is achieved postmortem through examination of central 
nervous system (CNS) tissue, and is contingent on identification of characteristic 
histopathologic lesions, detection of PrPres, or electron microscopic visualization of 
scrapie-associated fibrils.6  Because PrPres is the only currently known disease-specific 
macromolecule, all commercially available diagnostic assays rely on its immunological 
detection.10  These assays have limited diagnostic sensitivity in that PrPres accumulation 
may not be detectable until late during the incubation period, within months prior to onset 
of clinical disease.27  Infected animals that are early in the incubation period can only be 
identified through demonstration of tissue infectivity using bioassay.  The only lesions 
associated with BSE are found microscopically within CNS tissue.38,39  Lesions develop 
late in the disease process, roughly coinciding with the onset of clinical signs.  These 
consist of non-inflammatory vacuolar degeneration, or spongiform change, of grey matter 
and neuronal cell bodies.  Astrocytosis and cerebral amyloidosis, features of other TSEs, 
are unusual with
Text Len: 1702
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
,39  Lesions develop 
late in the disease process, roughly coinciding with the onset of clinical signs.  These 
consist of non-inflammatory vacuolar degeneration, or spongiform change, of grey matter 
and neuronal cell bodies.  Astrocytosis and cerebral amyloidosis, features of other TSEs, 
are unusual with BSE. 
 
 4
 
Breed-dependent differential susceptibility or incubation period has not been observed 
with BSE,42 and there is little variability in the bovine PrP gene.23  The consistent 
neuroanatomical lesion profile in the brains of cattle affected with BSE,36,39 and uniform 
glycoform ratios of PrPres as determined by immunoblotting,21,28 suggest the existence of 
a single strain of the BSE agent.  However, a recently described atypical form of BSE, 
termed bovine amyloidotic spongiform encephalopathy (BASE), has modified glycoform 
patterns similar to sporadic CJD in humans, and may represent an alternative strain of 
BSE agent.18 
  
Although TSEs are usually confined to an individual species, concern has arisen for the 
potential of inter-species transmission of BSE.  The BSE agent is widely recognized as 
the cause of variant CJD in humans, based on epidemiological and mouse inoculation 
studies,15,46 and biochemical PrPres characteristics.21   In addition, natural exposure to 
BSE agent has led to similar encephalopathic disease in captive wild ungulates and cats,25 
and in domestic cats.47 
 
Measures established by the United States to prevent new cases of BSE have included 
restrictions on the
Text Len: 1533
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

studies,15,46 and biochemical PrPres characteristics.21   In addition, natural exposure to 
BSE agent has led to similar encephalopathic disease in captive wild ungulates and cats,25 
and in domestic cats.47 
 
Measures established by the United States to prevent new cases of BSE have included 
restrictions on the importation of ruminants and ruminant-derived products from 
countries affected with BSE or that present undue risk of BSE (9CFR Parts 93, 94, 95, 
96, and 98) and prohibition of feeding mammalian-derived proteins, with exceptions, to 
ruminants (21CFR589.2000).  Mitigating measures have been considered to effectively 
reduce the likelihood of BSE introduction and amplification in U.S. cattle.20  Food-safety 
precautions implemented by the United States to protect the consumer have included the 
exclusion of non-ambulatory cattle from slaughter for human consumption, prohibitions 
on the use of specified risk material as human food, and prohibitions on the use of 
mechanically separated beef in human food (69 FR 1826, January 12, 2004;  69 FR 
42255, July 14, 2004); prohibition of the use of air-injection stunning devices to 
immobilize cattle during slaughter (69 FR 1885-1891); and prohibitions on the use of 
certain tissues in advanced meat recovery systems and additional process controls on 
these systems (69 FR 1874-1885).  
 
Purpose, rationale, and objectives of surveillance 
 
Animal and public health concerns have led to the establishment of active surveillance 
programs among other regulatory measures to monitor and prevent disease.  Active 
surveillance for BSE was initiated in the United States in 1990.
Text Len: 1652
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 process controls on 
these systems (69 FR 1874-1885).  
 
Purpose, rationale, and objectives of surveillance 
 
Animal and public health concerns have led to the establishment of active surveillance 
programs among other regulatory measures to monitor and prevent disease.  Active 
surveillance for BSE was initiated in the United States in 1990.  In response to 
identification of a BSE-affected imported dairy cow in December 2003, the U.S. 
Enhanced BSE Surveillance Program was implemented in June 2004.  Through these 
efforts, 2 cases of BSE were identified through March 2006.  Both cases were in beef 
cattle over ten years old (born before the feed ban of 1997), one located in Texas and one 
in Alabama. 
 
Based on data collected in the United States over the last seven years, including over a 
half million samples from the Enhanced Surveillance program, the USDA has developed 
an estimate of prevalence of BSE among U.S. cattle that was extremely low, projected at 
 
 5
less than 1 case per million animals in the standing adult cattle population at the 95% 
confidence level.1  In addition, the USDA demonstrated that surveillance efforts to date 
far exceed the World Organization for Animal Health (Office Internationales des 
Epizooties [OIE]) “type A” surveillance requirements.  Prevalence is expected to decline 
as long as mitigation efforts that maintain low risk for introduction and spread of the BSE 
agent among U.S. cattle are equivalent to or better than those evaluated by the Harvard 
Risk Assessment.20  The present plan details the objectives and methods considered 
pertinent and necessary for Ongoing BSE Surveillance. 
 
The principal purposes of Ongoing BSE Surveillance are: 
1
Text Len: 1718
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 that maintain low risk for introduction and spread of the BSE 
agent among U.S. cattle are equivalent to or better than those evaluated by the Harvard 
Risk Assessment.20  The present plan details the objectives and methods considered 
pertinent and necessary for Ongoing BSE Surveillance. 
 
The principal purposes of Ongoing BSE Surveillance are: 
1. To continue to assess and monitor change in the BSE status of U.S. cattle.   
2. To provide mechanisms for detection of BSE prevalence if it were to increase 
above 1 infected animal per million adults. 
 
Expected outcomes 
 
The results of Ongoing BSE Surveillance will be used for decision-making and policy 
development regarding design and implementation of future BSE surveillance programs 
and control efforts.  Results will also be used to facilitate contingency plans for national 
BSE control and response programs and to evaluate the effectiveness of mitigations and 
control measures that have been implemented to reduce the risk of introduction and 
spread of BSE among U.S. cattle.  The planned response to confirmed cases of BSE are 
described elsewhere.3,7  
 
Additionally, the implementation of a strong BSE surveillance strategy will help provide 
reassurance to consumers and international trading partners regarding our ability to detect 
a problem if one should arise.  The results of the surveillance program will be an 
important component of documenting the BSE status of U.S. cattle.  The USDA has 
designed this surveillance program to meet or exceed the internationally accepted 
surveillance practices recommended by the OIE. Compliance with OIE guidelines is an 
important component of assuring trading partners of the quality of our surveillance 
efforts.2 USDA expects that this robust surveillance program will continue to provide the 
foundation for market confidence
Text Len: 1855
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.S. cattle.  The USDA has 
designed this surveillance program to meet or exceed the internationally accepted 
surveillance practices recommended by the OIE. Compliance with OIE guidelines is an 
important component of assuring trading partners of the quality of our surveillance 
efforts.2 USDA expects that this robust surveillance program will continue to provide the 
foundation for market confidence in the safety of U.S. cattle.   
 
Stakeholders and responsible parties 
 
Users of surveillance system information include policy makers within USDA, the U.S. 
livestock industry, consumer groups, trading partners, State Animal Health Offices, and 
data providers (sample collectors and veterinary diagnostic laboratories).  In addition to 
information users, beneficiaries of the surveillance information include the public, the 
U.S. cattle industry, consumer groups, and industries engaged in export markets for 
cattle-derived products.   
 
Data collection will be performed by a variety of parties.  Sample data will be collected 
by accredited veterinarians, Food Safety Inspection Service (FSIS) veterinarians and 
inspectors, veterinary diagnostic laboratory or public health laboratory personnel, and 
 
 6
qualified VS personnel (including animal health technicians and those involved with data 
entry).  VS Area Offices will direct efforts for resolution of problematic data.  
 
Samples will be tested for BSE through cooperation of NVSL and contracted veterinary 
diagnostic laboratories. Positive samples will be confirmed by NVSL. American 
Association of Veterinary Laboratory Diagnosticians (AAVLD) accredited laboratories 
participating in the National Animal Health Laboratory Network (NAHLN) may be 
contracted by NVSL to perform BSE screening tests, provided quality assurance 
standards are met (as described by the most current version of NVSL
Text Len: 1872
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. Positive samples will be confirmed by NVSL. American 
Association of Veterinary Laboratory Diagnosticians (AAVLD) accredited laboratories 
participating in the National Animal Health Laboratory Network (NAHLN) may be 
contracted by NVSL to perform BSE screening tests, provided quality assurance 
standards are met (as described by the most current version of NVSL protocols 
GPPISOP3501 and 3303).   
 
Training of sample collectors will be completed by Area Veterinarian in Charge (AVIC) 
office personnel with oversight by VS regional offices.  Data entry training will be 
completed by these parties as well as the BSE Help Desk.a 
 
Assessment of data quality, data analysis, and interpretation will be completed by the 
NSU, VS TSE program manager, and VS TSE epidemiologists.  Reporting and 
dissemination of surveillance results will be primarily the responsibility of the NSU. In 
addition to standard Agricultural Marketing Service audit procedures, the NSU will 
conduct a review of the surveillance system’s effectiveness.  NVSL will be responsible 
for quality assurance of laboratory results. 
 
POPULATION DESCRIPTION AND SAMPLING METHODS 
 
Current OIE guidelines emphasize the development of ongoing surveillance programs 
that focus on obtaining quality samples from high risk subpopulations rather than on a 
target number of animals.2  As a result, if surveillance can be efficiently targeted to the 
highest risk subpopulations, meaningful surveillance can occur with a fairly low number 
of animals (for an example of how the OIE numbers are calculated, see the Summary of 
BSE Enhanced Surveillance in the United States).9  For this reason, an important focus of 
the Ongoing Surveillance will be obtaining samples from cattle that
Text Len: 1756
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 if surveillance can be efficiently targeted to the 
highest risk subpopulations, meaningful surveillance can occur with a fairly low number 
of animals (for an example of how the OIE numbers are calculated, see the Summary of 
BSE Enhanced Surveillance in the United States).9  For this reason, an important focus of 
the Ongoing Surveillance will be obtaining samples from cattle that are “clinical 
suspects.”  This subpopulation of cattle, particularly cattle over 30 months of age, has 
been found to exhibit the highest prevalence of BSE. Inferences derived from 
surveillance findings will be generalized to the adult U.S. cattle population (i.e. target or 
inference population), which consists of approximately 42 million adult cattle.5 
 
Study (Targeted) Population 
 
Ongoing Surveillance will target subpopulations from the Enhanced Surveillance 
population with the highest probability of BSE detection.  Because BSE is exceedingly 
uncommon among U.S. cattle, the chosen targeted population will create intentional bias 
in the sample frame which favors detection of disease.  Cattle that are dead with unknown 
clinical history will be limited in the surveillance sampling strategy because they provide 
substantially less information than animals accompanied by clinical history.  As used in 
this Ongoing Surveillance plan, “dead with unknown clinical history” refers to cattle that 
                                                 
a Veterinary Services BSE Help Desk:  (866) 370-6611, bse.help@aphis.usda.gov 
 
 7
are already dead  prior to being presented for
Text Len: 1582
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   
a Veterinary Services BSE Help Desk:  (866) 370-6611, bse.help@aphis.usda.gov 
 
 7
are already dead  prior to being presented for BSE sample collection and that have no 
known clinical history other than “dead of unknown cause.”  Efforts for collecting 
clinical history data will be augmented for Ongoing Surveillance.  At least one clinical 
sign must be identified for each sampled animal.  Apparently healthy animals will not be 
targeted for surveillance. For those cattle without obvious CNS signs, sample collection 
on-farm will be preferred over other collection sites because the subtle and nonspecific 
nature of behavioral changes associated with BSE are best identified by those who handle 
cattle on a daily basis,2 and personnel on-farm are most suitable for providing this 
information.  
 
The targeted population for Ongoing Surveillance consists of cattle of any breed that fit 
one of the following clinical presentation criteria: 
 
1. Cattle of any age with CNS signs 
 
This category includes cattle exhibiting signs consistent with a central nervous 
system disorder (including rabies-negative cases from public health laboratories, 
and FSIS condemns for “CNS signs” or “rabies”). 
 
Additionally, this category includes cattle highly suspicious for BSE as indicated 
by VS Memo 580.16, which includes:  1) cattle affected by illnesses that are 
refractory to treatment (including anorexia, loss of condition in spite of good 
appetite, pneumonia, decreased milk yield) and are displaying progressive 
behavioral changes
Text Len: 1582
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
Additionally, this category includes cattle highly suspicious for BSE as indicated 
by VS Memo 580.16, which includes:  1) cattle affected by illnesses that are 
refractory to treatment (including anorexia, loss of condition in spite of good 
appetite, pneumonia, decreased milk yield) and are displaying progressive 
behavioral changes that are not of an acute nature (including apprehension, 
nervousness, excitability, aggression, head shyness, hypermetria, kicking when 
milked, difficulty in rising, excessive nose scratching, or hesitation at 
gates/barriers); 2) cattle displaying progressive neurological signs that cannot be 
attributed to infectious illness and are not responsive to treatment. 
 
2. Cattle ≥ 30 months of ageb that are condemned during antemortem inspection 
or are excluded from slaughter due to poor health status (nonambulatory, 
unhealthy, or dead) 
 
This category includes: 
 
a) Cattle that are condemned by FSIS at antemortem inspection for any 
reason (other than “CNS signs” or “rabies,” which are covered above 
under “Cattle of any age with CNS signs”). 
 
b) Cattle without a history of CNS signs for which sample collection occurs 
on-farm, at veterinary clinics, or at livestock sale or auction barns and that 
are dead, nonambulatory, or have clinical signs that may be associated 
with BSE.  For those cattle that are dead prior to arrival of sampling 
                                              
Text Len: 1448
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 dead, nonambulatory, or have clinical signs that may be associated 
with BSE.  For those cattle that are dead prior to arrival of sampling 
                                                 
b Age of 30 months or older is evidenced by the eruption of at least one of the second set of permanent 
incisors.  
 
 
 8
personnel on-farm, additional clinical history must be available other than 
“dead of unknown cause.” 
 
c) Cattle presented to veterinary diagnostic laboratories for necropsy or for 
ancillary diagnostics without a history of CNS signs but which had clinical 
signs that may be associated with BSE. 
 
d) Cattle from renderers or 3D/4D facilities (up to a maximum of 5,000) that 
are dead, nonambulatory, or sick.  Collection of clinical history is 
preferable for these samples but is not required. 
 
The Enhanced Surveillance data provide information on the number of clinical suspects 
and the number of nonambulatory, unhealthy, or dead animals over 30 months classified 
by collection site.9 We expect that collection sites yielding the highest proportion of 
clinical suspects relative to the number of animals sampled will continue to do so.  
Accordingly, because renderers and 3D/4D facilities produced the most samples but 
proportionately the fewest clinical suspects in the Enhanced Surveillance program, we 
will limit samples from these facilities to 5,000 animals. 
 
Sample Points and Numbers to Meet OIE Surveillance Standards 
 
APHIS is committed to maintaining BSE
Text Len: 1501
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 so.  
Accordingly, because renderers and 3D/4D facilities produced the most samples but 
proportionately the fewest clinical suspects in the Enhanced Surveillance program, we 
will limit samples from these facilities to 5,000 animals. 
 
Sample Points and Numbers to Meet OIE Surveillance Standards 
 
APHIS is committed to maintaining BSE surveillance that at least meets OIE guidelines.  
The OIE BSE surveillance guidelines recommend a target number of surveillance points 
for Type A surveillance based on the size of a country’s cattle population.  These points 
are accrued over 7 consecutive years, and are weighted according to the surveillance 
stream and age of the animal sampled.  For a large cattle population, using the design 
prevalence of 1 case per 100,000 adult cattle and 95% confidence, 300,000 total points 
over 7 years, or 42,857 points per year are required for Type A surveillance.2 
 
The four surveillance streams identified in the OIE Code are clinical suspects; casualty 
slaughter; fallen stock; and healthy slaughter.  OIE guidelines recommend sampling from 
at least three of the four surveillance streams.  BSE surveillance efforts in the US have 
always focused on the three surveillance streams where BSE is more likely to be found – 
clinical suspects, casualty slaughter, and fallen stock.  During the 7 consecutive years 
prior to March 17, 2006, the United States collected 735,213 BSE samples from these 
surveillance streams and accumulated 2,973,804 OIE points.9   
 
If the Ongoing Surveillance plan maintains similar sample numbers from these 
surveillance streams, approximately 10,500 cattle per year would be sufficient to meet the 
OIE minimum number of sample points for Type A surveillance. 
Text Len: 1743
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
35,213 BSE samples from these 
surveillance streams and accumulated 2,973,804 OIE points.9   
 
If the Ongoing Surveillance plan maintains similar sample numbers from these 
surveillance streams, approximately 10,500 cattle per year would be sufficient to meet the 
OIE minimum number of sample points for Type A surveillance.  
 
2,973,804 points ÷ 735,213 samples = 4.1 points per sample  
and 
42,857 points required per year ÷ 4.1 points per sample = 10,453 samples per year 
 
 
 9
The Ongoing Surveillance plan targets relatively few of the lowest value samples (i.e., 
only 5,000 renderer and 3D-4D origin samples as compared to over ½ million during 
Enhanced Surveillance). Thus, the point value per sample will be higher than 4.1, and 
10,453 samples from Ongoing Surveillance will easily exceed the OIE requirements. 
 
Sample Points and Sample Size for BSE Prevalence Estimates 
 
The OIE minimum number of samples as outlined would be sufficient for a design 
prevalence of 1 case per 100,000 adult cattle.  In the interest of maintaining confidence in 
previous BSE prevalence estimates, a more sensitive design prevalence of 1 case per 
1,000,000 adult cattle will be adopted for Ongoing Surveillance. 
 
The point tables described by OIE surveillance guidelines were designed using the 
BSurvE model to represent the most conservative scenario of the characteristics of the 
cattle populations of all its member States.  These conservative demographic 
characteristics describe a population that culls cattle very rapidly (mean age of 
approximately 4 years) and results in point values that are that are much lower than
Text Len: 1636
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 point tables described by OIE surveillance guidelines were designed using the 
BSurvE model to represent the most conservative scenario of the characteristics of the 
cattle populations of all its member States.  These conservative demographic 
characteristics describe a population that culls cattle very rapidly (mean age of 
approximately 4 years) and results in point values that are that are much lower than the 
BSurvE model would calculate for cattle in most countries.   The United States has 
relevant demographic data pertaining to the adult cattle population that indicate 25% of 
the adult cattle population of approximately 42 million are dairy production type and 
75% are beef cattle.30  While the U.S. dairy population undergoes rapid culling similar to 
the conservative characteristics used to develop the OIE table, beef cattle generally 
remain in the herd to a much older age until they no longer produce calves.   
 
The BSurvE model can be used to determine sample point values based on a particular 
population’s demographics. Because actual U.S. data are available regarding population 
characteristics, and because this population differs significantly from that used for the 
conservative OIE estimates, it is appropriate to base the sample size estimates on the 
points calculated through BSurvE given U.S. demographics (these points are hereafter 
referred to as “analytical points”). The higher average age at which beef cattle are culled 
influences the BSurvE output and results in substantially higher point values.  Hence, 
sample values calculated with BSurvE from actual U.S. data result in higher point values 
than the conservative OIE estimates .  Each analytical point calculated by BSurvE 
corresponds to a single non-targeted sample.45   
 
According to OIE, B
Text Len: 1803
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SurvE output and results in substantially higher point values.  Hence, 
sample values calculated with BSurvE from actual U.S. data result in higher point values 
than the conservative OIE estimates .  Each analytical point calculated by BSurvE 
corresponds to a single non-targeted sample.45   
 
According to OIE, BSurvE and Cannon and Roe17calculations, the required number of 
non-targeted samples needed to detect a prevalence of 1 case per million adult cattle with 
95% confidence (given a population size of 42 million adult cattle) is 3,000,000, 
2,995,730, and 2,891,389, respectively.  Conservatively using the value of 3 million, we 
calculate that we will need to accumulate 428,571 analytical points (with negative 
results) per year across a period of 7 years to meet this objective.   
 
3,000,000 analytical points ÷ 7 years = 428,571 analytical points per year 
 
 
 10
The prevalence analysis conducted on U.S. surveillance data collected from March, 1999 
through March 2006 reports 6,745,010 points resulting from 735,213 samples.  The 
average sample was worth 9.5 analytical points.1 
 
6,745,010 analytic points ÷ 735,213 samples = 9.5 analytic points per sample 
 
If USDA maintained an equivalent mix of surveillance streams during Ongoing 
Surveillance, then approximately 45,113 samples per year would be required to meet this 
objective. 
 
428,571 analytical points per year ÷ 9.5 analytical points per sample = 45,113 
samples per year 
 
However, greater than one half million of the samples from Enhanced
Text Len: 1536
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 an equivalent mix of surveillance streams during Ongoing 
Surveillance, then approximately 45,113 samples per year would be required to meet this 
objective. 
 
428,571 analytical points per year ÷ 9.5 analytical points per sample = 45,113 
samples per year 
 
However, greater than one half million of the samples from Enhanced Surveillance were 
collected from fallen stock – the surveillance stream that produced the lowest point 
values.  Sampling efforts can be focused on higher value surveillance streams – clinical 
suspects and casualty slaughter – with a limited number of samples obtained from the 
fallen stock surveillance stream.  This will increase the average point value per sample.    
Therefore, we estimate that 40,000 samples collected from these 3 surveillance streams – 
with a focus on clinical suspects and casualty slaughter - will exceed the number of 
points necessary to maintain confidence that prevalence is less than 1 infected animal per 
million adult cattle.  Further, since the data are analyzed over 7 consecutive years, the 
estimate of sample size may be adjusted each year as appropriate to assure a robust 
prevalence estimate. 
 
Study Area Under Surveillance 
 
The collection sites for this sampling plan have been selected to include animals from all 
sections of the United States and comprise nationally representative avenues through 
which cattle exit production. In combination, these data sources provide the opportunity 
for cattle residing in any part of the country or segment of industry to be sampled: 
• Slaughter facilities are located throughout the United States and service every 
constituent of the production industry.  Additionally, western States that 
practice open range grazing and do not have access to renderers, or may not 
observe animal deaths, will still ship cull cattle to FSIS-inspected facilities in 
other States
Text Len: 1892
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 segment of industry to be sampled: 
• Slaughter facilities are located throughout the United States and service every 
constituent of the production industry.  Additionally, western States that 
practice open range grazing and do not have access to renderers, or may not 
observe animal deaths, will still ship cull cattle to FSIS-inspected facilities in 
other States. 
• Rendering facilities or 3D/4D facilities are located throughout the United 
States.  Some of these facilities draw from the same populations as the 
slaughter facilities, as they are the disposal facility for offal and condemned 
animals from the slaughter facilities.  Focusing on these facilities, and on 
rendering facilities in geographic locations with only limited disposal 
alternatives will help ensure a broad geographical representation.  The 
inclusion of these facilities ensures access to the fallen stock surveillance 
stream. 
• On-farm sample collection allows that samples will be collected wherever 
cattle reside. Efforts will be made across the nation to encourage the 
 
 11
participation of veterinary professionals and paraprofessionals in on-farm 
sample collection. 
• There are no areas in the nation that cannot submit fresh whole cattle brain to 
a public health or veterinary diagnostic laboratory. 
 
A qualitative, not quantitative, analysis of sample origin and collection site will be 
employed for Ongoing Surveillance sampling.c With increased emphasis on the 
importance of obtaining samples from high risk subpopulations, establishing and meeting 
a specific numeric target for the total number of cattle sampled becomes relatively less 
important.  The results of Enhanced Surveillance allowed us to identify the collection 
sites that are more likely to yield clinical suspects. Nevertheless, it is important to obtain 
coverage of all potential streams at all collection sites in order to maximize the likelihood
Text Len: 1926
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 samples from high risk subpopulations, establishing and meeting 
a specific numeric target for the total number of cattle sampled becomes relatively less 
important.  The results of Enhanced Surveillance allowed us to identify the collection 
sites that are more likely to yield clinical suspects. Nevertheless, it is important to obtain 
coverage of all potential streams at all collection sites in order to maximize the likelihood 
that we will obtain samples from clinical suspects. 
 
OIE Guidelines and Surveillance Streams 
 
Samples will be assigned to the surveillance streams described in Article 3.8.4.2 of the 
OIE Terrestrial Animal Health code.  The stream to which a sample is assigned will be 
based on clinical signs that are provided, sample source, and condemnation code data.  
Note that samples within the “Routine Slaughter” stream (from Article 3.8.4.2) will not 
be collected during Ongoing Surveillance.  The OIE surveillance streams and the criteria 
by which samples will be assigned to them are listed below.  
 
1. Clinical suspect – cattle displaying behavioral or clinical signs consistent 
with BSE. 
 
Article 3.8.4.2 of the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health code describes this group as 
follows:  “Cattle affected by illnesses that are refractory to treatment, and 
displaying progressive behavioral changes such as excitability, persistent kicking 
when milked, changes in herd hierarchical status, hesitation at doors, gates and 
barriers, as well as those displaying progressive neurological signs without signs 
of infectious illness are candidates for examination.  These behavioral changes, 
being very subtle, are best identified by those who handle animals on a daily 
basis.” 
 
Samples will be assigned to this surveillance stream if they are from
Text Len: 1788
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 hierarchical status, hesitation at doors, gates and 
barriers, as well as those displaying progressive neurological signs without signs 
of infectious illness are candidates for examination.  These behavioral changes, 
being very subtle, are best identified by those who handle animals on a daily 
basis.” 
 
Samples will be assigned to this surveillance stream if they are from cattle defined 
as highly suspicious as outlined in VS Memorandum 580.16, were tested negative 
for rabies at a public health or veterinary diagnostic laboratory, had CNS signs or 
were condemned by FSIS for CNS signs or rabies, or if the likelihood ratio for 
clinical signs associated with BSE is above an appropriate cutoff value (methods 
for these determinations are described elsewhere).9  Most of these samples are 
                                                 
c A quantitative analysis of geographical representation is difficult to interpret since cattle movement in the 
United States is poorly defined, and a sample’s site of collection site may not correspond to where the 
animal was born or resided most of its life (i.e., the area where BSE transmission would have occurred).  
Statistical comparison of geographic regions in the Enhanced Surveillance analysis and the paucity of 
positive cases provide no evidence that BSE prevalence varies by region within the United States. 
 
 12
anticipated to be derived from samples collected on-farm.  A substantial number 
will also be contributed by FSIS, veterinary diagnostic laboratories, and public 
health laboratories. 
 
2. Casualty slaughter –cattle over 30 months of age that are non-ambulatory, 
recumbent
Text Len: 1660
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 prevalence varies by region within the United States. 
 
 12
anticipated to be derived from samples collected on-farm.  A substantial number 
will also be contributed by FSIS, veterinary diagnostic laboratories, and public 
health laboratories. 
 
2. Casualty slaughter –cattle over 30 months of age that are non-ambulatory, 
recumbent, unable to rise or to walk without assistance, sent for emergency 
slaughter, or condemned at antemortem inspection. 
 
Samples will be assigned to this surveillance stream if the likelihood ratio for 
clinical signs being associated with BSE is below an appropriate cutoff value, and 
if the sample meets the OIE criteria for this stream.  Most of these samples are 
anticipated to be derived from FSIS-inspected slaughter plants.  However, a 
considerable number will be contributed by other data sources such as on-farm 
and veterinary diagnostic laboratories. 
 
3. Fallen stock – cattle over 30 months of age that are found dead on farm, or 
during transport to or at an abattoir. 
 
Samples will be assigned to this surveillance stream if the likelihood ratio for clinical 
signs being associated with BSE is below an appropriate cutoff value, and if the sample 
meets the OIE criteria for this stream.  These samples are anticipated to contribute a 
negligible portion of total points.  
 
Table 2.  OIE point values for each surveillance stream by cattle age 
 Clinical 
suspect 
Casualty 
slaughter 
Fallen 
stock 
Routine 
slaughter 
(Apparently Healthy) 
Age ≥ 1 year and < 2 years N/A 0.4 0.2 0.01 
Age ≥ 2 years and < 4 years 260 0
Text Len: 1581
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 values for each surveillance stream by cattle age 
 Clinical 
suspect 
Casualty 
slaughter 
Fallen 
stock 
Routine 
slaughter 
(Apparently Healthy) 
Age ≥ 1 year and < 2 years N/A 0.4 0.2 0.01 
Age ≥ 2 years and < 4 years 260 0.4 0.2 0.1 
Age ≥ 4 years and < 7 years 750 1.6 0.9 0.2 
Age ≥ 7 years and < 9 years 220 0.7 0.4 0.1 
Age ≥ 9 years 45 0.2 0.1 0.0 
 
Sample collection sites 
 
The following sites have been selected based on observations from Enhanced 
Surveillance including relative quality of data collected, average point value per sample, 
and total sample numbers.  Additionally, these collection sites comprise nationally 
representative avenues through which cattle may exit the adult cattle population and be 
available for sampling.  Cattle meeting the targeted criteria will be sampled from the 
following sites: 
 
1. On-Farm 
These samples may be collected by accredited veterinarians, Federal or State 
employees (including animal health technicians), or VS-approved dead stock 
haulers.  Under VS Area Office oversight, sample collectors with other 
 
 13
qualifications may be enlisted when resources preclude the participation of 
aforementioned sample collectors in a given area.  Although these samples may 
have a higher cost relative to other data sources, they are anticipated to have 
higher value to surveillance since the accuracy, quantity, and perceived validity of 
clinical history is superior relative to other data sources. 
  
2. Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratories 
Cattle submitted for necropsy, or fresh whole brainstem
Text Len: 1565
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 a given area.  Although these samples may 
have a higher cost relative to other data sources, they are anticipated to have 
higher value to surveillance since the accuracy, quantity, and perceived validity of 
clinical history is superior relative to other data sources. 
  
2. Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratories 
Cattle submitted for necropsy, or fresh whole brainstem submitted for ancillary 
diagnostics to veterinary diagnostic laboratories, including those not involved in 
BSE testing, will be sampled by laboratory personnel.  Such samples are usually 
accompanied by significant clinical history and thus are of high value to 
surveillance. 
 
3. Public Health Laboratories 
Samples from cattle that are rabies suspects and test negative for rabies will be 
submitted for BSE testing by laboratory personnel.  All samples derived from this 
data source can be characterized as clinically suspicious for BSE, and thus are of 
high value to surveillance. 
 
4. Slaughter (FSIS) 
Cattle 30 months or older condemned at antemortem inspection, and cattle of any 
age condemned for “CNS signs” or “rabies,” will be sampled by FSIS employees 
or designated off-site sample collection facilities. 
 
5. Facilities contracted to collect samples from cattle condemned by FSIS at 
antemortem inspection 
Samples derived from animals condemned by FSIS personnel at antemortem 
inspection may be collected by personnel of a contracted rendering or 3D/4D 
facility, or other APHIS approved facility.  Under these circumstances, 
communication of condemnation codes, clinical signs, and condemnation tag 
numbers (Z-tags) to the contracted facility is imperative. 
 
6. Rendering or 3D/4D facilities  

Text Len: 1696
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 may be collected by personnel of a contracted rendering or 3D/4D 
facility, or other APHIS approved facility.  Under these circumstances, 
communication of condemnation codes, clinical signs, and condemnation tag 
numbers (Z-tags) to the contracted facility is imperative. 
 
6. Rendering or 3D/4D facilities  
In order to represent the “fallen stock” surveillance stream and a wide variety of 
data sources, 5,000 samples will be collected over a 12-month period from 
targeted cattle presented to rendering or 3D/4D facilities.  A quota is selectively 
applied to this collection site type since these samples tend to lack adequate 
clinical history, making them a less reliable source for clinical suspect animals.  
 
Sampling progress will be monitored on a monthly basis.  If the results differ 
considerably from expectations, the sampling strategy may be adjusted.  For example, 
should we find that our expectations of sites most likely to yield clinical suspects are not 
met, we may refocus sampling efforts to other collection sites.  Similarly should we find 
there are substantially large numbers of non-clinical-suspect cattle being sampled, we 
may reduce the intensity of our sampling in these categories.  Such restrictions may 
involve reducing or stopping the collection of samples on-farm, at veterinary clinics, or 
 
 14
auction barns or reducing or stopping the collection of cattle condemned by FSIS. 
However, samples will be collected without restriction throughout the sampling period 
from cattle with CNS signs, rabies suspects, those considered highly suspicious for BSE, 
or cattle condemned by FSIS for CNS disorders or rabies regardless of the avenue 
through which they present to surveillance, and regardless of the degree with which 
sampling
Text Len: 1780
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 collection of cattle condemned by FSIS. 
However, samples will be collected without restriction throughout the sampling period 
from cattle with CNS signs, rabies suspects, those considered highly suspicious for BSE, 
or cattle condemned by FSIS for CNS disorders or rabies regardless of the avenue 
through which they present to surveillance, and regardless of the degree with which 
sampling goals have been met. 
 
Sample points derived from Enhanced Surveillance have provided a substantial cushion 
for potential deficiency during Ongoing Surveillance.  Since international standards allow 
points to be included in surveillance analysis over a 7-year time period, there is 
considerable time to adjust Ongoing Surveillance to meet surveillance needs with the 
most cost-efficient methods of sampling. 
 
 
COLLECTION METHODS  
 
Data Collection Methods  
 
Data collection methods will utilize the structures and processes established in the 
Enhanced Surveillance program. Sample data should be collected using the forms 
employed by Enhanced Surveillance:  USDA BSE Surveillance Submission Form and 
USDA BSE Surveillance Data Collection Form.  Forms are completed by the sample 
collector either by hand (paper forms) or electronically, through the NAHLN Web site 
(nahln.aphis.usda.gov/nahln/jsp/login.jsp). If the collection site cannot complete data 
entry electronically, paper copies must be forwarded to a designated USDA:VS office or 
the BSE Helpdesk for data entry.  Training of data entry is overseen by VS area and 
regional offices, and the BSE Help Desk. 
 
A hard copy of the BSE Surveillance Submission Form must be submitted to the 
diagnostic laboratory. If samples are not accompanied by the appropriate submission 
forms with all necessary information, it is the responsibility of
Text Len: 1809
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BSE Helpdesk for data entry.  Training of data entry is overseen by VS area and 
regional offices, and the BSE Help Desk. 
 
A hard copy of the BSE Surveillance Submission Form must be submitted to the 
diagnostic laboratory. If samples are not accompanied by the appropriate submission 
forms with all necessary information, it is the responsibility of the diagnostic laboratories 
to contact the sample collection site. Diagnostic laboratories may report collection sites 
that are repeatedly problematic to the appropriate AVIC for correctional efforts. 
 
The USDA BSE Surveillance Submission Form must be completed for each set of 
samples from a particular collection site and date.  The USDA BSE Surveillance Data 
Collection Form must be completed for each animal sampled.  All types of ID present on 
the animal must be provided, including silver tag number, owner ear tag number, 
vaccination tag number, condemnation tag number, back tag number, bangle tag number, 
ear tattoo, brands, or microchip.  In the case of samples from cattle condemned at 
antemortem inspection, the “Z” tag (FSIS condemnation tag number) must be recorded.  
A “Primary Reason for Submission,” is used to assure the sample collector that the 
animal being sampled is appropriate for surveillance (i.e. is a member of the targeted 
population).  It is imperative that the clinical signs section be completed as thoroughly 
and accurately as possible because data from this section of the form are used for 
allocation of samples into appropriate surveillance streams during data analysis. 
 
 15
 
Data relevant to the results of laboratory testing are entered through the NALHN 
interface by diagnostic laboratory personnel.  Results can include any of the following: 
• Not Detected – negative by ELISA or IHC 

Text Len: 1801
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 data from this section of the form are used for 
allocation of samples into appropriate surveillance streams during data analysis. 
 
 15
 
Data relevant to the results of laboratory testing are entered through the NALHN 
interface by diagnostic laboratory personnel.  Results can include any of the following: 
• Not Detected – negative by ELISA or IHC 
• Not detected, not obex* – negative by ELISA; although the sample appeared 
to be brainstem, the laboratory technician could not identify the sample as 
obex tissue  
• Not tested* – sample not tested because sample could not be recognized as 
brainstem by the laboratory technician 
• Initial reactor – positive on first screening (ELISA) test 
• Inconclusive – following a positive on the first screening test, at least one 
additional test is positive when the screening test is repeated in duplicate  
• IHC Inconclusive – sample with equivocal immunohistochemistry results 
• Positive – samples positive either by IHC or immunoblotting 
 
*For these selections, the reason for the result must be further specified as one of the 
following: 
• Advanced tissue decomposition  
• Wrong anatomic location  
• Tissue disrupted preventing anatomic orientation 
 
Sample Collection Methods  
 
Samples may be collected by authorized Federal or State personnel, accredited 
veterinarians, APHIS-contracted employees, or diagnostic laboratory personnel. 
 
Animal identification items (drawings or digital pictures of brands, removed tattooed 
hide, ear tags, etc.) should be collected from each animal sampled, bagged, labeled with 
the sample number, attached to a copy of the USDA BSE Surveillance Submission Form, 
and saved by the sample collector until negative results are
Text Len: 1732
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
racted employees, or diagnostic laboratory personnel. 
 
Animal identification items (drawings or digital pictures of brands, removed tattooed 
hide, ear tags, etc.) should be collected from each animal sampled, bagged, labeled with 
the sample number, attached to a copy of the USDA BSE Surveillance Submission Form, 
and saved by the sample collector until negative results are received.  
 
Brainstem samples may be collected through the foramen magnum, using a brain spoon 
or other extraction techniques (such as water extraction or compressed air), after 
disarticulation of the atlanto-occipital joint.  Alternatively, a brainstem sample may be 
collected by dismantling the calvarium (e.g. when retrieving the whole brain for rabies 
diagnosis).  An appropriate brainstem sample includes obex with little contamination or 
postmortem decomposition.  Samples with post-mortem or post-collection decomposition 
such that they cannot be recognized as brainstem will not be tested by the diagnostic 
laboratory.  Sample collectors should submit samples that have questionable testability 
and allow laboratory technicians to decide if tissue integrity precludes testing.  
Diagnostic laboratories will be compensated for efforts related to determining sample 
testability.   
 
Samples may be held prior to submission to the diagnostic laboratory, provided they are 
refrigerated (e.g., for sending multiple samples in one shipment). These should be 
 
 16
submitted as soon as possible, but may be held for no longer than 7 days.  Samples 
should not be frozen. 
 
Fresh brainstem samples are individually packaged in plastic tubes labeled with a unique 
BSE sample identification bar code supplied by the USDA.  Samples are enclosed with 
cold packs in insulated packages and
Text Len: 1781
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 be 
 
 16
submitted as soon as possible, but may be held for no longer than 7 days.  Samples 
should not be frozen. 
 
Fresh brainstem samples are individually packaged in plastic tubes labeled with a unique 
BSE sample identification bar code supplied by the USDA.  Samples are enclosed with 
cold packs in insulated packages and are shipped by overnight contract delivery service 
(e.g. Federal Express), same-day courier service, or by hand delivery to a NALHN 
laboratory that offers BSE test service the following business day. Once shipped, delivery 
of samples to diagnostic laboratories should be completed within 24 hours so as to 
preserve sample integrity.  If samples are received by a diagnostic laboratory on a non-
operating weekday, samples will be held under refrigeration by the diagnostic laboratory 
and subsequently tested on the next operating weekday.  If test results are urgently 
needed, the AVIC office may dictate that samples be redirected to an operating diagnostic 
laboratory. For samples with “inconclusive” test results, all remaining tissue must be 
immediately forwarded to NVSL (per the most current version of NVSL protocol 
GPPISOP0029). The timeline of procedures and reporting that occur in response to a 
positive case are described elsewhere.3,7 
 
The diagnostic laboratory is responsible for entering test results into the NAHLN 
database and for notifying the sample submitter of test results electronically, by phone, or 
in writing.  This should be completed within 24-48 hours of test completion.  Additional 
parties, including the AVIC and State veterinary office, may also be notified of results 
given that an arrangement has been agreed upon between the diagnostic laboratory and 
additional party.  APHIS Animal Identification
Text Len: 1782
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 sample submitter of test results electronically, by phone, or 
in writing.  This should be completed within 24-48 hours of test completion.  Additional 
parties, including the AVIC and State veterinary office, may also be notified of results 
given that an arrangement has been agreed upon between the diagnostic laboratory and 
additional party.  APHIS Animal Identification Coordinators (AIC) may assist with 
sample delivery verification and troubleshooting.  Training of sample collectors is 
completed by AVIC offices and VS regional offices, and, at their discretion, state 
veterinary offices. It is the responsibility of the AVIC offices to monitor sample 
collectors in the relevant area for habitual poor sample collection technique. 
 
Animal Disposal 
 
Carcasses from negative animals are disposed of in compliance with Federal, State, and 
local laws.  Carcasses and offal from “inconclusive” or positive animals may be disposed 
of by one of the following: rendering for non-animal feed use by dedicated facilities, 
burial in a landfill, burial on-farm, alkaline digestion, or incineration.  Rendering 
facilities may refrigerate or freeze carcasses, or may proceed with rendering and hold 
batches of final products, pending test results.  Should a positive animal occur with the 
latter method, an indemnity would be supplied for the disposed batches of products.  
 
Clinical Case Definition 
 
Clinical case definitions are not applicable to the present surveillance methods.  Because 
clinical signs have such poor specificity and sensitivity for BSE diagnosis, and because 
the diagnostic assays used for BSE diagnosis are considered to have near perfect analytic 
sensitivity and specificity (i.e. cattle with detectable disease are reliably differentiated 
from cattle without
Text Len: 1801
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
inical Case Definition 
 
Clinical case definitions are not applicable to the present surveillance methods.  Because 
clinical signs have such poor specificity and sensitivity for BSE diagnosis, and because 
the diagnostic assays used for BSE diagnosis are considered to have near perfect analytic 
sensitivity and specificity (i.e. cattle with detectable disease are reliably differentiated 
from cattle without detectable disease), BSE diagnosis is solely based on laboratory 
 
 17
criteria.  The case definition used for surveillance is the laboratory case definition for 
BSE as defined by the most current version of NVSL document GPISOP0034. 
 
Laboratory Criteria for Diagnosis 
 
The diagnostic strategy implemented for BSE surveillance is described elsewhere (most 
current versions of NVSL protocols GPPISOP0027 and GPPISOP0034). 
 
ANALYSIS, REPORTING, AND PRESENTATION  
 
The NSU is the party primarily responsible for data analysis and reporting. Reports 
produced by the NSU for the Deputy Administrator of VS and his designates will include 
monthly reports used for program monitoring and oversight, and an annual summary 
report analogous to that produced at the conclusion of the Enhanced Surveillance 
program.  The annual summary report is intended to tally surveillance points derived 
from BSE surveillance efforts over the last 7 years using the OIE Code.  Additionally, 
this report will provide an estimate of BSE prevalence, and/or demonstrate freedom from 
disease in U.S. cattle. The information provided by the annual report may be further 
tabulated for public consumption at the request of the Deputy Administrator; however 
monthly reports are anticipated to remain for internal USDA use only.  Measures that will 
be portrayed by the monthly reports, in tabular and graphical format, include monthly
Text Len: 1834
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
/or demonstrate freedom from 
disease in U.S. cattle. The information provided by the annual report may be further 
tabulated for public consumption at the request of the Deputy Administrator; however 
monthly reports are anticipated to remain for internal USDA use only.  Measures that will 
be portrayed by the monthly reports, in tabular and graphical format, include monthly and 
cumulative numbers of targeted samples, non-targeted samples, “not detected, not obex” 
samples, and total samples stratified by collection site type, submission reason, and 
geographical area.  Monthly reports will be used to assess progress toward national 
sampling goals with respect to point totals.  
 
Data analysis will be performed throughout the Ongoing Surveillance to assess sampling 
progress. Data quality will be monitored periodically using an error-checking routine to 
identify information that is outside expected values or for key data that are missing. 
Samples that do not meet the targeted sampling criteria will be identified, and feedback 
will be provided through appropriate channels to sample collectors that submit non-
targeted samples. Many mechanisms are already in place in the existing BSE database 
that prevent common data entry errors and that require recording of important sample 
data.  
 
 
 18
REFERENCES 
 
1  An Estimate of the prevalence of BSE in the United States. USDA/APHIS, Centers for Epidemiology 
and Animal Health, National Surveillance Unit, April 2006. Accessed May 5, 2006 online at 
http://www.aphis.usda.gov/newsroom/hot_issues/bse/content/printable_version/BSEprevalence-
estimate4-26-06.pdf 
2  Appendix 3.8.4: Surveillance for bovine
Text Len: 1679
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Animal Health, National Surveillance Unit, April 2006. Accessed May 5, 2006 online at 
http://www.aphis.usda.gov/newsroom/hot_issues/bse/content/printable_version/BSEprevalence-
estimate4-26-06.pdf 
2  Appendix 3.8.4: Surveillance for bovine spongiform encephalopathy. In: Terrestrial animal health code, 
14th ed. Office International des Epizooties, Paris, 2005 
3  Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) response plan summary. USDA Animal and Plant Health 
Inspection Service and Food Safety and Inspection Service. Accessed May 5, 2006 online at: 
http://www.aphis.usda.gov/lpa/issues/bse/bsesum.pdf. 
4  BSE: Statistics - Youngest and oldest cases by year of onset - Great Britain (passive surveillance only). 
Department for Environment, Food, and Rural Affairs, 2005. Accessed May 5, 2006 online at: 
http://www.defra.gov.uk/animalh/bse/statistics/bse/yng-old.html. 
5  Cattle Final Estimates 1999-2003. USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service, 2004. Accessed May 
5, 2006 online at: http://usda.mannlib.cornell.edu/usda/reports/general/sb/sb989.pdf. 
6  Chapter 2.3.13: Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy. In: Terrestrial animal health code, 14th ed. Office 
International des Epizooties, Paris, 2005 
7  FDA bovine spongiform encephalopathy emergency response plan summary. U.S. Food and Drug 
Administ
Text Len: 1316
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
989.pdf. 
6  Chapter 2.3.13: Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy. In: Terrestrial animal health code, 14th ed. Office 
International des Epizooties, Paris, 2005 
7  FDA bovine spongiform encephalopathy emergency response plan summary. U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration, 2004. Accessed May 5, 2006 online at: 
http://www.fda.gov/oc/opacom/hottopics/bseplan/bseplan.html. 
8  Scientific report of the European Food Safety Authority on the BSE surveillance model (BSurvE) 
estabilished by the Community Reference Laboratory for TSE. European Food Safety Authority, 2004. 
Available online at: 
http://www.efsa.eu.int/science/tse_assessments/bse_tse/661/sr17_bsetse_bsurve_en1.pdf. 
9  Summary of BSE Enhanced Surveillance in the United States. USDA/APHIS, Center for Epidemiology 
and Animal Health, National Surveillance Unit, April 2006. Accessed May 5, 2006 online at 
http://www.aphis.usda.gov/newsroom/hot_issues/bse/content/printable_version/SummaryEnhancedBSE
-Surv4-26-06.pdf 
10  Aguzzi A, Heikenwalder M, Miele G: Progress and problems in the biology, diagnostics, and 
therapeutics of prion diseases. J Clin Invest 114: 153-160, 2004 
11  Anderson RM, Donnelly CA, Ferguson NM, Woolhouse MEJ, Watt CJ, Udy HJ, MaWhinney S, 
Dunstan SP,
Text Len: 1241
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ikenwalder M, Miele G: Progress and problems in the biology, diagnostics, and 
therapeutics of prion diseases. J Clin Invest 114: 153-160, 2004 
11  Anderson RM, Donnelly CA, Ferguson NM, Woolhouse MEJ, Watt CJ, Udy HJ, MaWhinney S, 
Dunstan SP, Southwood TRE, Wilesmith JW, Ryans JBM, Hionville LJ, Hillerton JE, Austin AR, 
Wells GAH: Transmission dynamics and epidemiology of BSE in British cattle. Nature 382: 779-788, 
1996 
12  Arnold ME, Wilesmith JW: Estimation of the age-dependent risk of infection to BSE of dairy cattle in 
Great Britain. Prev Vet Med 66: 35-47, 2004 
 
 19
13  Bolton DC, McKinley MP, Prusiner SB: Identification of a protein that purifies with the scrapie prion. 
Science 218: 1309-1311, 1982 
14  Borchelt DR, Scott M, Taraboulos A, Stahl N, Prusiner SB: Scrapie and cellular prion proteins differ in 
their kinetics of synthesis and topology in cultured cells. J Cell Biol 110: 743-752, 1990 
15  Bruce ME, Will RG, Ironside JW, McConnell I, Drummond D, Suttie A, McCardle L, Chree A, Hope J, 
Birkett C, Cousens SN, Fraser H, Bostock CJ: Transmissions to mice indicate that 'new variant' CJD is 
caused by the BSE agent. Nature 389: 498-501, 1997 
16  Bueler H, Aguzzi A, Sailer
Text Len: 1212
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, McCardle L, Chree A, Hope J, 
Birkett C, Cousens SN, Fraser H, Bostock CJ: Transmissions to mice indicate that 'new variant' CJD is 
caused by the BSE agent. Nature 389: 498-501, 1997 
16  Bueler H, Aguzzi A, Sailer A, Greiner RA, Auternried P, Aguet M, Weissmann C: Mice devoid of PrP 
are resistant to Scrapie. Cell 73: 1339-1347, 1993 
17  Cannon RM, Roe RT: Livestock Disease Surveys: A Field Manual for Veterinarians Australian Bureau 
of Animal Health, Canberra, 1982 
18  Casalone C, Zanusso G, Acutis P, Ferrari S, Capucci L, Tagliavini F, Monaco S, Caramelli M: 
Identification of a second bovine amyloidotic spongiform encephalopathy: Molecular similarities with 
sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101: 3065-3070, 2004 
19  Caughey B, Raymond GJ: The scrapie-associated form of PrP is made from a cell surface precursor that 
is both protease- and phospholipase-sensitive. J Biol Chem 266: 18217-18223, 1991 
20  Cohen JT, Duggar K, Gray GM, Kreindel S, Abdelrahman H, Habtemariam T, Oryang D, Tameru B: 
Evaluation of the potential for bovine spongiform encephalopathy in the United States. Harvard Center 
for Risk Analysis, harvard School of Public Health; and Center for Computational Epidemiology, 

Text Len: 1243
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
gar K, Gray GM, Kreindel S, Abdelrahman H, Habtemariam T, Oryang D, Tameru B: 
Evaluation of the potential for bovine spongiform encephalopathy in the United States. Harvard Center 
for Risk Analysis, harvard School of Public Health; and Center for Computational Epidemiology, 
College of Veterinary Medicine, Tuskegee University, 2001. Accessed May 5, 2006 online at: 
http://www.aphis.usda.gov/lpa/issues/bse/risk_assessment/mainreporttext.pdf. 
21  Collinge J, Sidle KCL, Meads J, Ironside JW, Hill AF: Molecular analysis of prion strain variation and 
the aetiology of 'new variant' CJD. Nature 383: 685-690, 1996 
22  Donnelly CA, Ghani AC: Analysis of the bovine spongiform encephalopathy maternal cohort study: 
evidence for direct maternal transmission. Appl Statist 46: 321-344, 1997 
23  Goldmann W, Hunter N, Martin T, Dawson M, Hope J: Different forms of bovine PrP gene have five or 
six copies of a short G-C rich element within the protein coding exon. J Gen Virol 72: 201-204, 1991 
24  Kaneko K, Peretz D, Pan K-M, Blochberger TC, Wille H, Gabizon R, Griffith OH, Cohen FE, Baldwin 
MA, Prusiner SB: Prion protein (PrP) synthetic peptides induce cellular PrP to acquire properties of the 
scrapie isoform. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 92: 11160-11164, 1995 
25  Kirkwood JK, Cunningham AA
Text Len: 1301
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, Wille H, Gabizon R, Griffith OH, Cohen FE, Baldwin 
MA, Prusiner SB: Prion protein (PrP) synthetic peptides induce cellular PrP to acquire properties of the 
scrapie isoform. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 92: 11160-11164, 1995 
25  Kirkwood JK, Cunningham AA: Epidemiological observations on spongiform encephalopathies in 
captive wild animals in the British Isles. Vet Rec 135: 296-303, 1994 
26  Kocisko DA, Come JH, Priola S, A., Chesebro B, Raymond GJ, Lansbury PT, Caughey B: Cell-free 
formation of protease-resistant prion protein. Nature 370: 471-474, 1994 
 
 20
27  Kubler E, Oesch B, Raeber A: Diagnosis of prion diseases. Br Med Bull 66: 267-279, 2003 
28  Kuczius T, Haist I, Groschup MH: Molecular analysis of bovine spongiform encephalopathy and 
scrapie strain variation. J Infect Dis 178: 693-699, 1998 
29  McKinley MP, Bolton DC, Prusiner SB: A protease-resistant protein is a structural component of the 
scrapie prion. Cell 35: 57-62, 1983 
30  NASS (2005) Cattle, National Agricultural Statistics Service, USDA.  Washington, D.C.  Released 
January 28, 2005, by the National Agricultural Statistics.  Service (NASS), Agricultural Statistics 
Board, U.S. Department of  Agriculture. Available 12/15/05 at: 
http://usda.mannlib.cornell.edu/reports/nassr/
Text Len: 1272
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, National Agricultural Statistics Service, USDA.  Washington, D.C.  Released 
January 28, 2005, by the National Agricultural Statistics.  Service (NASS), Agricultural Statistics 
Board, U.S. Department of  Agriculture. Available 12/15/05 at: 
http://usda.mannlib.cornell.edu/reports/nassr/livestock/pct-bb/catl0101.txt 
31  Phillips N, Bridgeman J, Ferguson-Smith M: The BSE Inquiry: the report. Her majesty's Stationery 
Office (HMSO) Publications Centre, 2000. Accessed May 5, 2006 online at: 
http://www.bseinquiry.gov.uk/report/volume2/toc.htm. 
32  Prusiner SB: Novel proteinaceous infectious particles cause scrapie. Science 216: 136-144, 1982 
33  Prusiner SB, Scott M, Foster D, Pan KM, Groth D, Mirenda C, Torchia M, Yang SL, Serban D, Carlson 
GA, Hoppe PC, Westaway D, DeArmond SJ: Transgenetic studies implicate interactions between 
homologous PrP isoforms in scrapie prion replication. Cell 63: 673-686, 1990 
34  Race RE, Jenny A, Sutton D: Scrapie infectivity and proteinase K-resistant prion protein in sheep 
placenta, brain, and lymph node: Implications for transmission and antemortem diagnosis. J Infect Dis 
178: 949-953, 1998 
35  Saegerman C, Speybroeck N, Roels S, Vanopdenbosch E, Thiry E, Berkvens D: Decision support tools 
for clinical diagnosis of disease in cows with suspected
Text Len: 1309
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 brain, and lymph node: Implications for transmission and antemortem diagnosis. J Infect Dis 
178: 949-953, 1998 
35  Saegerman C, Speybroeck N, Roels S, Vanopdenbosch E, Thiry E, Berkvens D: Decision support tools 
for clinical diagnosis of disease in cows with suspected bovine spongiform encephalopathy. J Clin 
Microbiol 42: 172-178, 2004 
36  Simmons MM, Harris P, Jeffrey M, Meek SC, Blamire IWH, Wells GAH: BSE in Great Britain: 
consistency of the neurohistopathological findings in two random annual samples of clinically suspect 
cases. Vet Rec 138: 175-177, 1996 
37  Taylor DM: Inactivation of transmissible degenerative encephalopathy agents: A review. Vet J 159: 10-
17, 2000 
38  Wells GAH, Scott AC, Johnson CT, Gunning RF, Hancock RD, Jeffrey M, Dawson M, Bradley R: A 
novel progressive spongiform encephalopathy in cattle. Vet Rec 121: 419-420, 1987 
39  Wells GAH, Wilesmith JW: The neuropathology and epidemiology of bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy. Brain Pathol 5: 91-103, 1995 
40  Wilesmith JW, Ryan JBM, Atkinson MJ: Bovine spongiform encephalopathy: epidemiological studies 
of the origin. Vet Rec 128: 199-203, 1991 
 
 21
41  Wilesmith JW, Ryan JBM, Hueston WD: Bovine spongiform encephalopathy: case-control studies of 
calf feeding practices and meat and bone meal inclusion in proprietary concentrates. Res
Text Len: 1339
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 spongiform encephalopathy: epidemiological studies 
of the origin. Vet Rec 128: 199-203, 1991 
 
 21
41  Wilesmith JW, Ryan JBM, Hueston WD: Bovine spongiform encephalopathy: case-control studies of 
calf feeding practices and meat and bone meal inclusion in proprietary concentrates. Res Vet Sci 52: 
325, 1992 
42  Wilesmith JW, Ryan JBM, Hueston WD, Hoinville LJ: Bovine spongiform encephalopathy: 
epidemiological features 1985 to 1990. Vet Rec 130: 90-94, 1992 
43  Wilesmith JW, Wells GAH, Cranwell MP, Ryan JBM: Bovine spongiform encephalopathy: 
Epidemiological studies. Vet Rec 123: 638-644, 1988 
44  Wilesmith JW, Wells GAH, Ryan JB, Gavier-Widen D, Simmons MM: A cohort study to examine 
maternally-associated risk factors for bovine spongiform encephalopathy. Vet Rec 141: 239-243, 1997 
45  Wilesmith J, Morris R, Stevenson M, Cannon R, Prattley D, and Benard H (2004) Development of a 
Method for the Evaluation of National Surveillance Data and Optimization of National Surveillance 
Strategies for Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy. Weybridge, England, European Union TSE 
Community Reference Laboratory, Veterinary Laboratories Agency.   
46  Will RG, Ironside JW, Zeidler M, Cousens SN, Estiberio K, Alperovitch A, Poser S, Pocchiari M, 
Hofman A, Smith PG: A new variant of Creutzfeldt
Text Len: 1305
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
bridge, England, European Union TSE 
Community Reference Laboratory, Veterinary Laboratories Agency.   
46  Will RG, Ironside JW, Zeidler M, Cousens SN, Estiberio K, Alperovitch A, Poser S, Pocchiari M, 
Hofman A, Smith PG: A new variant of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in the UK. Lancet 347: 921-925, 
1996 
47  Wyatt JM, Pearson GR, Smerdon TN, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Wells GAH, Wilesmith JW: Naturally 
occurring scrapie-like spongiform encephalopathy in five domestic cats. Vet Rec 129: 233-236, 1991 
48  Yamakawa Y, Hagiwara K, Nohtomi K, Nakamura Y, Nishijima M, higuchi Y, Sato Y, Sata T: 
Atypical proteinase K-resistant prion protein (PrPres) observed in an apparently healthy 23-month-old 
Holstein steer. Jpn J Infect Dis 56: 221-222, 2003 
 
 
Text Len: 749
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE) 
Ongoing Surveillance Plan 
 
July 20, 2006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy Ongoing Surveillance Plan  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) has taken aggressive measures to prevent 
the introduction and potential spread of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), and 
has conducted surveillance since 1990 to monitor whether the disease was present.  
Surveillance was expanded in scope and intensity following the confirmation of BSE in 
an imported cow in December 2003.  This expanded surveillance effort was designed to 
estimate the level of disease present in the United States and provide input for designing 
a long-term surveillance plan.  
 
The present plan is intended to inform and educate USDA’s partners and stakeholders on 
approaches to be employed in ongoing BSE surveillance.  The plan retains the USDA’s 
ability to detect BSE at 1 infected animal per 1,000,000 adult cattle in the population with 
a high degree of confidence, maintains surveillance at levels that exceed international 
standards, emphasizes sample collection from cattle subpopulations where BSE is most 
likely to be detected, and retains sample collections from all important surveillance 
sources. 
 
The plan follows surveillance system design standards and guidelines established by the 
USDA’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), Veterinary Services (VS), 
National Surveillance Unit (NSU).  These guidelines are intended
Text Len: 1551
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 subpopulations where BSE is most 
likely to be detected, and retains sample collections from all important surveillance 
sources. 
 
The plan follows surveillance system design standards and guidelines established by the 
USDA’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), Veterinary Services (VS), 
National Surveillance Unit (NSU).  These guidelines are intended to assist planners and 
managers in considering specific objectives, design strategies, reporting systems, 
implementation methods, and long-term system maintenance.  The guidelines ensure that 
the objectives of the surveillance system are predefined, and that the collection, 
organization, and analysis of appropriate data are considered before implementation.  
Further, the guidelines provide a mechanism for review and evaluation to assure that the 
surveillance is providing the appropriate type and quality of information. 
 
Disease description 
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy, commonly known as “Mad Cow Disease”, is a 
transmissible neurodegenerative disease of adult cattle that emerged in Great Britain in 
1985,38 and has subsequently been identified in cattle of most European countries, 
Canada, the United States, and Japan.  BSE belongs to the group of transmissible 
spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs), together with scrapie of sheep, chronic wasting 
disease of free-ranging and captive deer and elk, and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) of 
humans.  TSEs have long latency periods, are untreatable, and currently cannot be 
prevented by vaccination since there is absence of a host immune response to infection.   
 
Most scientific evidence suggests that prions are the causative agent of TSEs;32  however, 
the nature of the prion
Text Len: 1728
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CJD) of 
humans.  TSEs have long latency periods, are untreatable, and currently cannot be 
prevented by vaccination since there is absence of a host immune response to infection.   
 
Most scientific evidence suggests that prions are the causative agent of TSEs;32  however, 
the nature of the prion remains undetermined.  A unique characteristic of the prion is its 
resistance to inactivation by most conventional physical or chemical decontamination 
methods.37  The prion consists mostly of protein, largely comprised by a proteinase-
resistant, disease-associated isoform (PrPres) of host-encoded prion protein (PrPC).29,32  
The pathogenesis of the TSEs requires the formation of PrPres from PrPC.16  Interaction 
 
 3
with PrPres leads to post-translational conformational modification of PrPC,24,26,33 resulting 
in its conversion to PrPres.14,19  The subsequent pathological accumulation of PrPres in 
certain tissues defines the TSEs.13,34 The pathogenesis of BSE appears to involve a much 
more restricted tissue distribution of PrPres accumulation than other animal TSEs, having 
reduced involvement of the lymphoreticular system.   
 
The origin of the BSE agent is unresolved. Theories have considered derivation from a 
TSE agent of another mammalian species, such as scrapie,40 or spontaneous genetic 
mutation of the bovid prion protein gene.31  The emergence of BSE coincided with 
reduced use of hydrocarbon solvents in the production of meat-and-bone meal (MBM) 
through carcass rendering.40 
 
Transmission of BSE is thought to primarily
Text Len: 1559
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 species, such as scrapie,40 or spontaneous genetic 
mutation of the bovid prion protein gene.31  The emergence of BSE coincided with 
reduced use of hydrocarbon solvents in the production of meat-and-bone meal (MBM) 
through carcass rendering.40 
 
Transmission of BSE is thought to primarily occur through ingestion of feedstuff, 
especially ruminant-derived MBM, contaminated with the BSE agent.41,43  Calves born to 
infected cows have increased risk to develop BSE,44 especially if born around the time of 
disease onset in the dam.22  However, the risk is probably influenced by conserved 
management practices where both the dam and calf have been fed concentrated feedstuff 
containing MBM early in life.12  Horizontal transmission of BSE between cattle is not 
believed to occur.  Most cattle become infected within the first 6 months of life.12  The 
mean incubation period for BSE is around 60 months, with clinical onset of disease 
occurring on average at 4-5 years of age.11  The age range of affected animals is very 
wide, although BSE is rarely confirmed in animals less than 30 months of age.4,48   
 
BSE is invariably fatal.  Clinical signs have an insidious onset and are largely 
nonspecific.  Signs that may be associated with BSE include apprehension, ataxia, 
emaciation, hypersensitivity to touch or sound, head shyness, panic-stricken response, 
kicking in the milking parlor, reluctance to enter the milking parlor, abnormal ear 
movement or carriage, increased alertness behavior, reduced milk yield, bruxism, and 
change in temperament.35,
Text Len: 1569
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 apprehension, ataxia, 
emaciation, hypersensitivity to touch or sound, head shyness, panic-stricken response, 
kicking in the milking parlor, reluctance to enter the milking parlor, abnormal ear 
movement or carriage, increased alertness behavior, reduced milk yield, bruxism, and 
change in temperament.35,43  The duration of clinical signs averages 1 to 2 months prior to 
death or slaughter, but may range from weeks to a year.43 
 
Although live animal tests are under development, at present, none are available to 
reliably detect BSE.  Diagnosis is achieved postmortem through examination of central 
nervous system (CNS) tissue, and is contingent on identification of characteristic 
histopathologic lesions, detection of PrPres, or electron microscopic visualization of 
scrapie-associated fibrils.6  Because PrPres is the only currently known disease-specific 
macromolecule, all commercially available diagnostic assays rely on its immunological 
detection.10  These assays have limited diagnostic sensitivity in that PrPres accumulation 
may not be detectable until late during the incubation period, within months prior to onset 
of clinical disease.27  Infected animals that are early in the incubation period can only be 
identified through demonstration of tissue infectivity using bioassay.  The only lesions 
associated with BSE are found microscopically within CNS tissue.38,39  Lesions develop 
late in the disease process, roughly coinciding with the onset of clinical signs.  These 
consist of non-inflammatory vacuolar degeneration, or spongiform change, of grey matter 
and neuronal cell bodies.  Astrocytosis and cerebral amyloidosis, features of other TSEs, 
are unusual with
Text Len: 1702
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
,39  Lesions develop 
late in the disease process, roughly coinciding with the onset of clinical signs.  These 
consist of non-inflammatory vacuolar degeneration, or spongiform change, of grey matter 
and neuronal cell bodies.  Astrocytosis and cerebral amyloidosis, features of other TSEs, 
are unusual with BSE. 
 
 4
 
Breed-dependent differential susceptibility or incubation period has not been observed 
with BSE,42 and there is little variability in the bovine PrP gene.23  The consistent 
neuroanatomical lesion profile in the brains of cattle affected with BSE,36,39 and uniform 
glycoform ratios of PrPres as determined by immunoblotting,21,28 suggest the existence of 
a single strain of the BSE agent.  However, a recently described atypical form of BSE, 
termed bovine amyloidotic spongiform encephalopathy (BASE), has modified glycoform 
patterns similar to sporadic CJD in humans, and may represent an alternative strain of 
BSE agent.18 
  
Although TSEs are usually confined to an individual species, concern has arisen for the 
potential of inter-species transmission of BSE.  The BSE agent is widely recognized as 
the cause of variant CJD in humans, based on epidemiological and mouse inoculation 
studies,15,46 and biochemical PrPres characteristics.21   In addition, natural exposure to 
BSE agent has led to similar encephalopathic disease in captive wild ungulates and cats,25 
and in domestic cats.47 
 
Measures established by the United States to prevent new cases of BSE have included 
restrictions on the
Text Len: 1533
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

studies,15,46 and biochemical PrPres characteristics.21   In addition, natural exposure to 
BSE agent has led to similar encephalopathic disease in captive wild ungulates and cats,25 
and in domestic cats.47 
 
Measures established by the United States to prevent new cases of BSE have included 
restrictions on the importation of ruminants and ruminant-derived products from 
countries affected with BSE or that present undue risk of BSE (9CFR Parts 93, 94, 95, 
96, and 98) and prohibition of feeding mammalian-derived proteins, with exceptions, to 
ruminants (21CFR589.2000).  Mitigating measures have been considered to effectively 
reduce the likelihood of BSE introduction and amplification in U.S. cattle.20  Food-safety 
precautions implemented by the United States to protect the consumer have included the 
exclusion of non-ambulatory cattle from slaughter for human consumption, prohibitions 
on the use of specified risk material as human food, and prohibitions on the use of 
mechanically separated beef in human food (69 FR 1826, January 12, 2004;  69 FR 
42255, July 14, 2004); prohibition of the use of air-injection stunning devices to 
immobilize cattle during slaughter (69 FR 1885-1891); and prohibitions on the use of 
certain tissues in advanced meat recovery systems and additional process controls on 
these systems (69 FR 1874-1885).  
 
Purpose, rationale, and objectives of surveillance 
 
Animal and public health concerns have led to the establishment of active surveillance 
programs among other regulatory measures to monitor and prevent disease.  Active 
surveillance for BSE was initiated in the United States in 1990.
Text Len: 1652
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 process controls on 
these systems (69 FR 1874-1885).  
 
Purpose, rationale, and objectives of surveillance 
 
Animal and public health concerns have led to the establishment of active surveillance 
programs among other regulatory measures to monitor and prevent disease.  Active 
surveillance for BSE was initiated in the United States in 1990.  In response to 
identification of a BSE-affected imported dairy cow in December 2003, the U.S. 
Enhanced BSE Surveillance Program was implemented in June 2004.  Through these 
efforts, 2 cases of BSE were identified through March 2006.  Both cases were in beef 
cattle over ten years old (born before the feed ban of 1997), one located in Texas and one 
in Alabama. 
 
Based on data collected in the United States over the last seven years, including over a 
half million samples from the Enhanced Surveillance program, the USDA has developed 
an estimate of prevalence of BSE among U.S. cattle that was extremely low, projected at 
 
 5
less than 1 case per million animals in the standing adult cattle population at the 95% 
confidence level.1  In addition, the USDA demonstrated that surveillance efforts to date 
far exceed the World Organization for Animal Health (Office Internationales des 
Epizooties [OIE]) “type A” surveillance requirements.  Prevalence is expected to decline 
as long as mitigation efforts that maintain low risk for introduction and spread of the BSE 
agent among U.S. cattle are equivalent to or better than those evaluated by the Harvard 
Risk Assessment.20  The present plan details the objectives and methods considered 
pertinent and necessary for Ongoing BSE Surveillance. 
 
The principal purposes of Ongoing BSE Surveillance are: 
1
Text Len: 1718
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 that maintain low risk for introduction and spread of the BSE 
agent among U.S. cattle are equivalent to or better than those evaluated by the Harvard 
Risk Assessment.20  The present plan details the objectives and methods considered 
pertinent and necessary for Ongoing BSE Surveillance. 
 
The principal purposes of Ongoing BSE Surveillance are: 
1. To continue to assess and monitor change in the BSE status of U.S. cattle.   
2. To provide mechanisms for detection of BSE prevalence if it were to increase 
above 1 infected animal per million adults. 
 
Expected outcomes 
 
The results of Ongoing BSE Surveillance will be used for decision-making and policy 
development regarding design and implementation of future BSE surveillance programs 
and control efforts.  Results will also be used to facilitate contingency plans for national 
BSE control and response programs and to evaluate the effectiveness of mitigations and 
control measures that have been implemented to reduce the risk of introduction and 
spread of BSE among U.S. cattle.  The planned response to confirmed cases of BSE are 
described elsewhere.3,7  
 
Additionally, the implementation of a strong BSE surveillance strategy will help provide 
reassurance to consumers and international trading partners regarding our ability to detect 
a problem if one should arise.  The results of the surveillance program will be an 
important component of documenting the BSE status of U.S. cattle.  The USDA has 
designed this surveillance program to meet or exceed the internationally accepted 
surveillance practices recommended by the OIE. Compliance with OIE guidelines is an 
important component of assuring trading partners of the quality of our surveillance 
efforts.2 USDA expects that this robust surveillance program will continue to provide the 
foundation for market confidence
Text Len: 1855
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.S. cattle.  The USDA has 
designed this surveillance program to meet or exceed the internationally accepted 
surveillance practices recommended by the OIE. Compliance with OIE guidelines is an 
important component of assuring trading partners of the quality of our surveillance 
efforts.2 USDA expects that this robust surveillance program will continue to provide the 
foundation for market confidence in the safety of U.S. cattle.   
 
Stakeholders and responsible parties 
 
Users of surveillance system information include policy makers within USDA, the U.S. 
livestock industry, consumer groups, trading partners, State Animal Health Offices, and 
data providers (sample collectors and veterinary diagnostic laboratories).  In addition to 
information users, beneficiaries of the surveillance information include the public, the 
U.S. cattle industry, consumer groups, and industries engaged in export markets for 
cattle-derived products.   
 
Data collection will be performed by a variety of parties.  Sample data will be collected 
by accredited veterinarians, Food Safety Inspection Service (FSIS) veterinarians and 
inspectors, veterinary diagnostic laboratory or public health laboratory personnel, and 
 
 6
qualified VS personnel (including animal health technicians and those involved with data 
entry).  VS Area Offices will direct efforts for resolution of problematic data.  
 
Samples will be tested for BSE through cooperation of NVSL and contracted veterinary 
diagnostic laboratories. Positive samples will be confirmed by NVSL. American 
Association of Veterinary Laboratory Diagnosticians (AAVLD) accredited laboratories 
participating in the National Animal Health Laboratory Network (NAHLN) may be 
contracted by NVSL to perform BSE screening tests, provided quality assurance 
standards are met (as described by the most current version of NVSL
Text Len: 1872
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. Positive samples will be confirmed by NVSL. American 
Association of Veterinary Laboratory Diagnosticians (AAVLD) accredited laboratories 
participating in the National Animal Health Laboratory Network (NAHLN) may be 
contracted by NVSL to perform BSE screening tests, provided quality assurance 
standards are met (as described by the most current version of NVSL protocols 
GPPISOP3501 and 3303).   
 
Training of sample collectors will be completed by Area Veterinarian in Charge (AVIC) 
office personnel with oversight by VS regional offices.  Data entry training will be 
completed by these parties as well as the BSE Help Desk.a 
 
Assessment of data quality, data analysis, and interpretation will be completed by the 
NSU, VS TSE program manager, and VS TSE epidemiologists.  Reporting and 
dissemination of surveillance results will be primarily the responsibility of the NSU. In 
addition to standard Agricultural Marketing Service audit procedures, the NSU will 
conduct a review of the surveillance system’s effectiveness.  NVSL will be responsible 
for quality assurance of laboratory results. 
 
POPULATION DESCRIPTION AND SAMPLING METHODS 
 
Current OIE guidelines emphasize the development of ongoing surveillance programs 
that focus on obtaining quality samples from high risk subpopulations rather than on a 
target number of animals.2  As a result, if surveillance can be efficiently targeted to the 
highest risk subpopulations, meaningful surveillance can occur with a fairly low number 
of animals (for an example of how the OIE numbers are calculated, see the Summary of 
BSE Enhanced Surveillance in the United States).9  For this reason, an important focus of 
the Ongoing Surveillance will be obtaining samples from cattle that
Text Len: 1756
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 if surveillance can be efficiently targeted to the 
highest risk subpopulations, meaningful surveillance can occur with a fairly low number 
of animals (for an example of how the OIE numbers are calculated, see the Summary of 
BSE Enhanced Surveillance in the United States).9  For this reason, an important focus of 
the Ongoing Surveillance will be obtaining samples from cattle that are “clinical 
suspects.”  This subpopulation of cattle, particularly cattle over 30 months of age, has 
been found to exhibit the highest prevalence of BSE. Inferences derived from 
surveillance findings will be generalized to the adult U.S. cattle population (i.e. target or 
inference population), which consists of approximately 42 million adult cattle.5 
 
Study (Targeted) Population 
 
Ongoing Surveillance will target subpopulations from the Enhanced Surveillance 
population with the highest probability of BSE detection.  Because BSE is exceedingly 
uncommon among U.S. cattle, the chosen targeted population will create intentional bias 
in the sample frame which favors detection of disease.  Cattle that are dead with unknown 
clinical history will be limited in the surveillance sampling strategy because they provide 
substantially less information than animals accompanied by clinical history.  As used in 
this Ongoing Surveillance plan, “dead with unknown clinical history” refers to cattle that 
                                                 
a Veterinary Services BSE Help Desk:  (866) 370-6611, bse.help@aphis.usda.gov 
 
 7
are already dead  prior to being presented for
Text Len: 1582
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   
a Veterinary Services BSE Help Desk:  (866) 370-6611, bse.help@aphis.usda.gov 
 
 7
are already dead  prior to being presented for BSE sample collection and that have no 
known clinical history other than “dead of unknown cause.”  Efforts for collecting 
clinical history data will be augmented for Ongoing Surveillance.  At least one clinical 
sign must be identified for each sampled animal.  Apparently healthy animals will not be 
targeted for surveillance. For those cattle without obvious CNS signs, sample collection 
on-farm will be preferred over other collection sites because the subtle and nonspecific 
nature of behavioral changes associated with BSE are best identified by those who handle 
cattle on a daily basis,2 and personnel on-farm are most suitable for providing this 
information.  
 
The targeted population for Ongoing Surveillance consists of cattle of any breed that fit 
one of the following clinical presentation criteria: 
 
1. Cattle of any age with CNS signs 
 
This category includes cattle exhibiting signs consistent with a central nervous 
system disorder (including rabies-negative cases from public health laboratories, 
and FSIS condemns for “CNS signs” or “rabies”). 
 
Additionally, this category includes cattle highly suspicious for BSE as indicated 
by VS Memo 580.16, which includes:  1) cattle affected by illnesses that are 
refractory to treatment (including anorexia, loss of condition in spite of good 
appetite, pneumonia, decreased milk yield) and are displaying progressive 
behavioral changes
Text Len: 1582
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
Additionally, this category includes cattle highly suspicious for BSE as indicated 
by VS Memo 580.16, which includes:  1) cattle affected by illnesses that are 
refractory to treatment (including anorexia, loss of condition in spite of good 
appetite, pneumonia, decreased milk yield) and are displaying progressive 
behavioral changes that are not of an acute nature (including apprehension, 
nervousness, excitability, aggression, head shyness, hypermetria, kicking when 
milked, difficulty in rising, excessive nose scratching, or hesitation at 
gates/barriers); 2) cattle displaying progressive neurological signs that cannot be 
attributed to infectious illness and are not responsive to treatment. 
 
2. Cattle ≥ 30 months of ageb that are condemned during antemortem inspection 
or are excluded from slaughter due to poor health status (nonambulatory, 
unhealthy, or dead) 
 
This category includes: 
 
a) Cattle that are condemned by FSIS at antemortem inspection for any 
reason (other than “CNS signs” or “rabies,” which are covered above 
under “Cattle of any age with CNS signs”). 
 
b) Cattle without a history of CNS signs for which sample collection occurs 
on-farm, at veterinary clinics, or at livestock sale or auction barns and that 
are dead, nonambulatory, or have clinical signs that may be associated 
with BSE.  For those cattle that are dead prior to arrival of sampling 
                                              
Text Len: 1448
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 dead, nonambulatory, or have clinical signs that may be associated 
with BSE.  For those cattle that are dead prior to arrival of sampling 
                                                 
b Age of 30 months or older is evidenced by the eruption of at least one of the second set of permanent 
incisors.  
 
 
 8
personnel on-farm, additional clinical history must be available other than 
“dead of unknown cause.” 
 
c) Cattle presented to veterinary diagnostic laboratories for necropsy or for 
ancillary diagnostics without a history of CNS signs but which had clinical 
signs that may be associated with BSE. 
 
d) Cattle from renderers or 3D/4D facilities (up to a maximum of 5,000) that 
are dead, nonambulatory, or sick.  Collection of clinical history is 
preferable for these samples but is not required. 
 
The Enhanced Surveillance data provide information on the number of clinical suspects 
and the number of nonambulatory, unhealthy, or dead animals over 30 months classified 
by collection site.9 We expect that collection sites yielding the highest proportion of 
clinical suspects relative to the number of animals sampled will continue to do so.  
Accordingly, because renderers and 3D/4D facilities produced the most samples but 
proportionately the fewest clinical suspects in the Enhanced Surveillance program, we 
will limit samples from these facilities to 5,000 animals. 
 
Sample Points and Numbers to Meet OIE Surveillance Standards 
 
APHIS is committed to maintaining BSE
Text Len: 1501
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 so.  
Accordingly, because renderers and 3D/4D facilities produced the most samples but 
proportionately the fewest clinical suspects in the Enhanced Surveillance program, we 
will limit samples from these facilities to 5,000 animals. 
 
Sample Points and Numbers to Meet OIE Surveillance Standards 
 
APHIS is committed to maintaining BSE surveillance that at least meets OIE guidelines.  
The OIE BSE surveillance guidelines recommend a target number of surveillance points 
for Type A surveillance based on the size of a country’s cattle population.  These points 
are accrued over 7 consecutive years, and are weighted according to the surveillance 
stream and age of the animal sampled.  For a large cattle population, using the design 
prevalence of 1 case per 100,000 adult cattle and 95% confidence, 300,000 total points 
over 7 years, or 42,857 points per year are required for Type A surveillance.2 
 
The four surveillance streams identified in the OIE Code are clinical suspects; casualty 
slaughter; fallen stock; and healthy slaughter.  OIE guidelines recommend sampling from 
at least three of the four surveillance streams.  BSE surveillance efforts in the US have 
always focused on the three surveillance streams where BSE is more likely to be found – 
clinical suspects, casualty slaughter, and fallen stock.  During the 7 consecutive years 
prior to March 17, 2006, the United States collected 735,213 BSE samples from these 
surveillance streams and accumulated 2,973,804 OIE points.9   
 
If the Ongoing Surveillance plan maintains similar sample numbers from these 
surveillance streams, approximately 10,500 cattle per year would be sufficient to meet the 
OIE minimum number of sample points for Type A surveillance. 
Text Len: 1743
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
35,213 BSE samples from these 
surveillance streams and accumulated 2,973,804 OIE points.9   
 
If the Ongoing Surveillance plan maintains similar sample numbers from these 
surveillance streams, approximately 10,500 cattle per year would be sufficient to meet the 
OIE minimum number of sample points for Type A surveillance.  
 
2,973,804 points ÷ 735,213 samples = 4.1 points per sample  
and 
42,857 points required per year ÷ 4.1 points per sample = 10,453 samples per year 
 
 
 9
The Ongoing Surveillance plan targets relatively few of the lowest value samples (i.e., 
only 5,000 renderer and 3D-4D origin samples as compared to over ½ million during 
Enhanced Surveillance). Thus, the point value per sample will be higher than 4.1, and 
10,453 samples from Ongoing Surveillance will easily exceed the OIE requirements. 
 
Sample Points and Sample Size for BSE Prevalence Estimates 
 
The OIE minimum number of samples as outlined would be sufficient for a design 
prevalence of 1 case per 100,000 adult cattle.  In the interest of maintaining confidence in 
previous BSE prevalence estimates, a more sensitive design prevalence of 1 case per 
1,000,000 adult cattle will be adopted for Ongoing Surveillance. 
 
The point tables described by OIE surveillance guidelines were designed using the 
BSurvE model to represent the most conservative scenario of the characteristics of the 
cattle populations of all its member States.  These conservative demographic 
characteristics describe a population that culls cattle very rapidly (mean age of 
approximately 4 years) and results in point values that are that are much lower than
Text Len: 1636
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 point tables described by OIE surveillance guidelines were designed using the 
BSurvE model to represent the most conservative scenario of the characteristics of the 
cattle populations of all its member States.  These conservative demographic 
characteristics describe a population that culls cattle very rapidly (mean age of 
approximately 4 years) and results in point values that are that are much lower than the 
BSurvE model would calculate for cattle in most countries.   The United States has 
relevant demographic data pertaining to the adult cattle population that indicate 25% of 
the adult cattle population of approximately 42 million are dairy production type and 
75% are beef cattle.30  While the U.S. dairy population undergoes rapid culling similar to 
the conservative characteristics used to develop the OIE table, beef cattle generally 
remain in the herd to a much older age until they no longer produce calves.   
 
The BSurvE model can be used to determine sample point values based on a particular 
population’s demographics. Because actual U.S. data are available regarding population 
characteristics, and because this population differs significantly from that used for the 
conservative OIE estimates, it is appropriate to base the sample size estimates on the 
points calculated through BSurvE given U.S. demographics (these points are hereafter 
referred to as “analytical points”). The higher average age at which beef cattle are culled 
influences the BSurvE output and results in substantially higher point values.  Hence, 
sample values calculated with BSurvE from actual U.S. data result in higher point values 
than the conservative OIE estimates .  Each analytical point calculated by BSurvE 
corresponds to a single non-targeted sample.45   
 
According to OIE, B
Text Len: 1803
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SurvE output and results in substantially higher point values.  Hence, 
sample values calculated with BSurvE from actual U.S. data result in higher point values 
than the conservative OIE estimates .  Each analytical point calculated by BSurvE 
corresponds to a single non-targeted sample.45   
 
According to OIE, BSurvE and Cannon and Roe17calculations, the required number of 
non-targeted samples needed to detect a prevalence of 1 case per million adult cattle with 
95% confidence (given a population size of 42 million adult cattle) is 3,000,000, 
2,995,730, and 2,891,389, respectively.  Conservatively using the value of 3 million, we 
calculate that we will need to accumulate 428,571 analytical points (with negative 
results) per year across a period of 7 years to meet this objective.   
 
3,000,000 analytical points ÷ 7 years = 428,571 analytical points per year 
 
 
 10
The prevalence analysis conducted on U.S. surveillance data collected from March, 1999 
through March 2006 reports 6,745,010 points resulting from 735,213 samples.  The 
average sample was worth 9.5 analytical points.1 
 
6,745,010 analytic points ÷ 735,213 samples = 9.5 analytic points per sample 
 
If USDA maintained an equivalent mix of surveillance streams during Ongoing 
Surveillance, then approximately 45,113 samples per year would be required to meet this 
objective. 
 
428,571 analytical points per year ÷ 9.5 analytical points per sample = 45,113 
samples per year 
 
However, greater than one half million of the samples from Enhanced
Text Len: 1536
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 an equivalent mix of surveillance streams during Ongoing 
Surveillance, then approximately 45,113 samples per year would be required to meet this 
objective. 
 
428,571 analytical points per year ÷ 9.5 analytical points per sample = 45,113 
samples per year 
 
However, greater than one half million of the samples from Enhanced Surveillance were 
collected from fallen stock – the surveillance stream that produced the lowest point 
values.  Sampling efforts can be focused on higher value surveillance streams – clinical 
suspects and casualty slaughter – with a limited number of samples obtained from the 
fallen stock surveillance stream.  This will increase the average point value per sample.    
Therefore, we estimate that 40,000 samples collected from these 3 surveillance streams – 
with a focus on clinical suspects and casualty slaughter - will exceed the number of 
points necessary to maintain confidence that prevalence is less than 1 infected animal per 
million adult cattle.  Further, since the data are analyzed over 7 consecutive years, the 
estimate of sample size may be adjusted each year as appropriate to assure a robust 
prevalence estimate. 
 
Study Area Under Surveillance 
 
The collection sites for this sampling plan have been selected to include animals from all 
sections of the United States and comprise nationally representative avenues through 
which cattle exit production. In combination, these data sources provide the opportunity 
for cattle residing in any part of the country or segment of industry to be sampled: 
• Slaughter facilities are located throughout the United States and service every 
constituent of the production industry.  Additionally, western States that 
practice open range grazing and do not have access to renderers, or may not 
observe animal deaths, will still ship cull cattle to FSIS-inspected facilities in 
other States
Text Len: 1892
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 segment of industry to be sampled: 
• Slaughter facilities are located throughout the United States and service every 
constituent of the production industry.  Additionally, western States that 
practice open range grazing and do not have access to renderers, or may not 
observe animal deaths, will still ship cull cattle to FSIS-inspected facilities in 
other States. 
• Rendering facilities or 3D/4D facilities are located throughout the United 
States.  Some of these facilities draw from the same populations as the 
slaughter facilities, as they are the disposal facility for offal and condemned 
animals from the slaughter facilities.  Focusing on these facilities, and on 
rendering facilities in geographic locations with only limited disposal 
alternatives will help ensure a broad geographical representation.  The 
inclusion of these facilities ensures access to the fallen stock surveillance 
stream. 
• On-farm sample collection allows that samples will be collected wherever 
cattle reside. Efforts will be made across the nation to encourage the 
 
 11
participation of veterinary professionals and paraprofessionals in on-farm 
sample collection. 
• There are no areas in the nation that cannot submit fresh whole cattle brain to 
a public health or veterinary diagnostic laboratory. 
 
A qualitative, not quantitative, analysis of sample origin and collection site will be 
employed for Ongoing Surveillance sampling.c With increased emphasis on the 
importance of obtaining samples from high risk subpopulations, establishing and meeting 
a specific numeric target for the total number of cattle sampled becomes relatively less 
important.  The results of Enhanced Surveillance allowed us to identify the collection 
sites that are more likely to yield clinical suspects. Nevertheless, it is important to obtain 
coverage of all potential streams at all collection sites in order to maximize the likelihood
Text Len: 1926
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 samples from high risk subpopulations, establishing and meeting 
a specific numeric target for the total number of cattle sampled becomes relatively less 
important.  The results of Enhanced Surveillance allowed us to identify the collection 
sites that are more likely to yield clinical suspects. Nevertheless, it is important to obtain 
coverage of all potential streams at all collection sites in order to maximize the likelihood 
that we will obtain samples from clinical suspects. 
 
OIE Guidelines and Surveillance Streams 
 
Samples will be assigned to the surveillance streams described in Article 3.8.4.2 of the 
OIE Terrestrial Animal Health code.  The stream to which a sample is assigned will be 
based on clinical signs that are provided, sample source, and condemnation code data.  
Note that samples within the “Routine Slaughter” stream (from Article 3.8.4.2) will not 
be collected during Ongoing Surveillance.  The OIE surveillance streams and the criteria 
by which samples will be assigned to them are listed below.  
 
1. Clinical suspect – cattle displaying behavioral or clinical signs consistent 
with BSE. 
 
Article 3.8.4.2 of the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health code describes this group as 
follows:  “Cattle affected by illnesses that are refractory to treatment, and 
displaying progressive behavioral changes such as excitability, persistent kicking 
when milked, changes in herd hierarchical status, hesitation at doors, gates and 
barriers, as well as those displaying progressive neurological signs without signs 
of infectious illness are candidates for examination.  These behavioral changes, 
being very subtle, are best identified by those who handle animals on a daily 
basis.” 
 
Samples will be assigned to this surveillance stream if they are from
Text Len: 1788
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 hierarchical status, hesitation at doors, gates and 
barriers, as well as those displaying progressive neurological signs without signs 
of infectious illness are candidates for examination.  These behavioral changes, 
being very subtle, are best identified by those who handle animals on a daily 
basis.” 
 
Samples will be assigned to this surveillance stream if they are from cattle defined 
as highly suspicious as outlined in VS Memorandum 580.16, were tested negative 
for rabies at a public health or veterinary diagnostic laboratory, had CNS signs or 
were condemned by FSIS for CNS signs or rabies, or if the likelihood ratio for 
clinical signs associated with BSE is above an appropriate cutoff value (methods 
for these determinations are described elsewhere).9  Most of these samples are 
                                                 
c A quantitative analysis of geographical representation is difficult to interpret since cattle movement in the 
United States is poorly defined, and a sample’s site of collection site may not correspond to where the 
animal was born or resided most of its life (i.e., the area where BSE transmission would have occurred).  
Statistical comparison of geographic regions in the Enhanced Surveillance analysis and the paucity of 
positive cases provide no evidence that BSE prevalence varies by region within the United States. 
 
 12
anticipated to be derived from samples collected on-farm.  A substantial number 
will also be contributed by FSIS, veterinary diagnostic laboratories, and public 
health laboratories. 
 
2. Casualty slaughter –cattle over 30 months of age that are non-ambulatory, 
recumbent
Text Len: 1660
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 prevalence varies by region within the United States. 
 
 12
anticipated to be derived from samples collected on-farm.  A substantial number 
will also be contributed by FSIS, veterinary diagnostic laboratories, and public 
health laboratories. 
 
2. Casualty slaughter –cattle over 30 months of age that are non-ambulatory, 
recumbent, unable to rise or to walk without assistance, sent for emergency 
slaughter, or condemned at antemortem inspection. 
 
Samples will be assigned to this surveillance stream if the likelihood ratio for 
clinical signs being associated with BSE is below an appropriate cutoff value, and 
if the sample meets the OIE criteria for this stream.  Most of these samples are 
anticipated to be derived from FSIS-inspected slaughter plants.  However, a 
considerable number will be contributed by other data sources such as on-farm 
and veterinary diagnostic laboratories. 
 
3. Fallen stock – cattle over 30 months of age that are found dead on farm, or 
during transport to or at an abattoir. 
 
Samples will be assigned to this surveillance stream if the likelihood ratio for clinical 
signs being associated with BSE is below an appropriate cutoff value, and if the sample 
meets the OIE criteria for this stream.  These samples are anticipated to contribute a 
negligible portion of total points.  
 
Table 2.  OIE point values for each surveillance stream by cattle age 
 Clinical 
suspect 
Casualty 
slaughter 
Fallen 
stock 
Routine 
slaughter 
(Apparently Healthy) 
Age ≥ 1 year and < 2 years N/A 0.4 0.2 0.01 
Age ≥ 2 years and < 4 years 260 0
Text Len: 1581
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 values for each surveillance stream by cattle age 
 Clinical 
suspect 
Casualty 
slaughter 
Fallen 
stock 
Routine 
slaughter 
(Apparently Healthy) 
Age ≥ 1 year and < 2 years N/A 0.4 0.2 0.01 
Age ≥ 2 years and < 4 years 260 0.4 0.2 0.1 
Age ≥ 4 years and < 7 years 750 1.6 0.9 0.2 
Age ≥ 7 years and < 9 years 220 0.7 0.4 0.1 
Age ≥ 9 years 45 0.2 0.1 0.0 
 
Sample collection sites 
 
The following sites have been selected based on observations from Enhanced 
Surveillance including relative quality of data collected, average point value per sample, 
and total sample numbers.  Additionally, these collection sites comprise nationally 
representative avenues through which cattle may exit the adult cattle population and be 
available for sampling.  Cattle meeting the targeted criteria will be sampled from the 
following sites: 
 
1. On-Farm 
These samples may be collected by accredited veterinarians, Federal or State 
employees (including animal health technicians), or VS-approved dead stock 
haulers.  Under VS Area Office oversight, sample collectors with other 
 
 13
qualifications may be enlisted when resources preclude the participation of 
aforementioned sample collectors in a given area.  Although these samples may 
have a higher cost relative to other data sources, they are anticipated to have 
higher value to surveillance since the accuracy, quantity, and perceived validity of 
clinical history is superior relative to other data sources. 
  
2. Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratories 
Cattle submitted for necropsy, or fresh whole brainstem
Text Len: 1565
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 a given area.  Although these samples may 
have a higher cost relative to other data sources, they are anticipated to have 
higher value to surveillance since the accuracy, quantity, and perceived validity of 
clinical history is superior relative to other data sources. 
  
2. Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratories 
Cattle submitted for necropsy, or fresh whole brainstem submitted for ancillary 
diagnostics to veterinary diagnostic laboratories, including those not involved in 
BSE testing, will be sampled by laboratory personnel.  Such samples are usually 
accompanied by significant clinical history and thus are of high value to 
surveillance. 
 
3. Public Health Laboratories 
Samples from cattle that are rabies suspects and test negative for rabies will be 
submitted for BSE testing by laboratory personnel.  All samples derived from this 
data source can be characterized as clinically suspicious for BSE, and thus are of 
high value to surveillance. 
 
4. Slaughter (FSIS) 
Cattle 30 months or older condemned at antemortem inspection, and cattle of any 
age condemned for “CNS signs” or “rabies,” will be sampled by FSIS employees 
or designated off-site sample collection facilities. 
 
5. Facilities contracted to collect samples from cattle condemned by FSIS at 
antemortem inspection 
Samples derived from animals condemned by FSIS personnel at antemortem 
inspection may be collected by personnel of a contracted rendering or 3D/4D 
facility, or other APHIS approved facility.  Under these circumstances, 
communication of condemnation codes, clinical signs, and condemnation tag 
numbers (Z-tags) to the contracted facility is imperative. 
 
6. Rendering or 3D/4D facilities  

Text Len: 1696
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 may be collected by personnel of a contracted rendering or 3D/4D 
facility, or other APHIS approved facility.  Under these circumstances, 
communication of condemnation codes, clinical signs, and condemnation tag 
numbers (Z-tags) to the contracted facility is imperative. 
 
6. Rendering or 3D/4D facilities  
In order to represent the “fallen stock” surveillance stream and a wide variety of 
data sources, 5,000 samples will be collected over a 12-month period from 
targeted cattle presented to rendering or 3D/4D facilities.  A quota is selectively 
applied to this collection site type since these samples tend to lack adequate 
clinical history, making them a less reliable source for clinical suspect animals.  
 
Sampling progress will be monitored on a monthly basis.  If the results differ 
considerably from expectations, the sampling strategy may be adjusted.  For example, 
should we find that our expectations of sites most likely to yield clinical suspects are not 
met, we may refocus sampling efforts to other collection sites.  Similarly should we find 
there are substantially large numbers of non-clinical-suspect cattle being sampled, we 
may reduce the intensity of our sampling in these categories.  Such restrictions may 
involve reducing or stopping the collection of samples on-farm, at veterinary clinics, or 
 
 14
auction barns or reducing or stopping the collection of cattle condemned by FSIS. 
However, samples will be collected without restriction throughout the sampling period 
from cattle with CNS signs, rabies suspects, those considered highly suspicious for BSE, 
or cattle condemned by FSIS for CNS disorders or rabies regardless of the avenue 
through which they present to surveillance, and regardless of the degree with which 
sampling
Text Len: 1780
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 collection of cattle condemned by FSIS. 
However, samples will be collected without restriction throughout the sampling period 
from cattle with CNS signs, rabies suspects, those considered highly suspicious for BSE, 
or cattle condemned by FSIS for CNS disorders or rabies regardless of the avenue 
through which they present to surveillance, and regardless of the degree with which 
sampling goals have been met. 
 
Sample points derived from Enhanced Surveillance have provided a substantial cushion 
for potential deficiency during Ongoing Surveillance.  Since international standards allow 
points to be included in surveillance analysis over a 7-year time period, there is 
considerable time to adjust Ongoing Surveillance to meet surveillance needs with the 
most cost-efficient methods of sampling. 
 
 
COLLECTION METHODS  
 
Data Collection Methods  
 
Data collection methods will utilize the structures and processes established in the 
Enhanced Surveillance program. Sample data should be collected using the forms 
employed by Enhanced Surveillance:  USDA BSE Surveillance Submission Form and 
USDA BSE Surveillance Data Collection Form.  Forms are completed by the sample 
collector either by hand (paper forms) or electronically, through the NAHLN Web site 
(nahln.aphis.usda.gov/nahln/jsp/login.jsp). If the collection site cannot complete data 
entry electronically, paper copies must be forwarded to a designated USDA:VS office or 
the BSE Helpdesk for data entry.  Training of data entry is overseen by VS area and 
regional offices, and the BSE Help Desk. 
 
A hard copy of the BSE Surveillance Submission Form must be submitted to the 
diagnostic laboratory. If samples are not accompanied by the appropriate submission 
forms with all necessary information, it is the responsibility of
Text Len: 1809
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BSE Helpdesk for data entry.  Training of data entry is overseen by VS area and 
regional offices, and the BSE Help Desk. 
 
A hard copy of the BSE Surveillance Submission Form must be submitted to the 
diagnostic laboratory. If samples are not accompanied by the appropriate submission 
forms with all necessary information, it is the responsibility of the diagnostic laboratories 
to contact the sample collection site. Diagnostic laboratories may report collection sites 
that are repeatedly problematic to the appropriate AVIC for correctional efforts. 
 
The USDA BSE Surveillance Submission Form must be completed for each set of 
samples from a particular collection site and date.  The USDA BSE Surveillance Data 
Collection Form must be completed for each animal sampled.  All types of ID present on 
the animal must be provided, including silver tag number, owner ear tag number, 
vaccination tag number, condemnation tag number, back tag number, bangle tag number, 
ear tattoo, brands, or microchip.  In the case of samples from cattle condemned at 
antemortem inspection, the “Z” tag (FSIS condemnation tag number) must be recorded.  
A “Primary Reason for Submission,” is used to assure the sample collector that the 
animal being sampled is appropriate for surveillance (i.e. is a member of the targeted 
population).  It is imperative that the clinical signs section be completed as thoroughly 
and accurately as possible because data from this section of the form are used for 
allocation of samples into appropriate surveillance streams during data analysis. 
 
 15
 
Data relevant to the results of laboratory testing are entered through the NALHN 
interface by diagnostic laboratory personnel.  Results can include any of the following: 
• Not Detected – negative by ELISA or IHC 

Text Len: 1801
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 data from this section of the form are used for 
allocation of samples into appropriate surveillance streams during data analysis. 
 
 15
 
Data relevant to the results of laboratory testing are entered through the NALHN 
interface by diagnostic laboratory personnel.  Results can include any of the following: 
• Not Detected – negative by ELISA or IHC 
• Not detected, not obex* – negative by ELISA; although the sample appeared 
to be brainstem, the laboratory technician could not identify the sample as 
obex tissue  
• Not tested* – sample not tested because sample could not be recognized as 
brainstem by the laboratory technician 
• Initial reactor – positive on first screening (ELISA) test 
• Inconclusive – following a positive on the first screening test, at least one 
additional test is positive when the screening test is repeated in duplicate  
• IHC Inconclusive – sample with equivocal immunohistochemistry results 
• Positive – samples positive either by IHC or immunoblotting 
 
*For these selections, the reason for the result must be further specified as one of the 
following: 
• Advanced tissue decomposition  
• Wrong anatomic location  
• Tissue disrupted preventing anatomic orientation 
 
Sample Collection Methods  
 
Samples may be collected by authorized Federal or State personnel, accredited 
veterinarians, APHIS-contracted employees, or diagnostic laboratory personnel. 
 
Animal identification items (drawings or digital pictures of brands, removed tattooed 
hide, ear tags, etc.) should be collected from each animal sampled, bagged, labeled with 
the sample number, attached to a copy of the USDA BSE Surveillance Submission Form, 
and saved by the sample collector until negative results are
Text Len: 1732
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
racted employees, or diagnostic laboratory personnel. 
 
Animal identification items (drawings or digital pictures of brands, removed tattooed 
hide, ear tags, etc.) should be collected from each animal sampled, bagged, labeled with 
the sample number, attached to a copy of the USDA BSE Surveillance Submission Form, 
and saved by the sample collector until negative results are received.  
 
Brainstem samples may be collected through the foramen magnum, using a brain spoon 
or other extraction techniques (such as water extraction or compressed air), after 
disarticulation of the atlanto-occipital joint.  Alternatively, a brainstem sample may be 
collected by dismantling the calvarium (e.g. when retrieving the whole brain for rabies 
diagnosis).  An appropriate brainstem sample includes obex with little contamination or 
postmortem decomposition.  Samples with post-mortem or post-collection decomposition 
such that they cannot be recognized as brainstem will not be tested by the diagnostic 
laboratory.  Sample collectors should submit samples that have questionable testability 
and allow laboratory technicians to decide if tissue integrity precludes testing.  
Diagnostic laboratories will be compensated for efforts related to determining sample 
testability.   
 
Samples may be held prior to submission to the diagnostic laboratory, provided they are 
refrigerated (e.g., for sending multiple samples in one shipment). These should be 
 
 16
submitted as soon as possible, but may be held for no longer than 7 days.  Samples 
should not be frozen. 
 
Fresh brainstem samples are individually packaged in plastic tubes labeled with a unique 
BSE sample identification bar code supplied by the USDA.  Samples are enclosed with 
cold packs in insulated packages and
Text Len: 1781
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 be 
 
 16
submitted as soon as possible, but may be held for no longer than 7 days.  Samples 
should not be frozen. 
 
Fresh brainstem samples are individually packaged in plastic tubes labeled with a unique 
BSE sample identification bar code supplied by the USDA.  Samples are enclosed with 
cold packs in insulated packages and are shipped by overnight contract delivery service 
(e.g. Federal Express), same-day courier service, or by hand delivery to a NALHN 
laboratory that offers BSE test service the following business day. Once shipped, delivery 
of samples to diagnostic laboratories should be completed within 24 hours so as to 
preserve sample integrity.  If samples are received by a diagnostic laboratory on a non-
operating weekday, samples will be held under refrigeration by the diagnostic laboratory 
and subsequently tested on the next operating weekday.  If test results are urgently 
needed, the AVIC office may dictate that samples be redirected to an operating diagnostic 
laboratory. For samples with “inconclusive” test results, all remaining tissue must be 
immediately forwarded to NVSL (per the most current version of NVSL protocol 
GPPISOP0029). The timeline of procedures and reporting that occur in response to a 
positive case are described elsewhere.3,7 
 
The diagnostic laboratory is responsible for entering test results into the NAHLN 
database and for notifying the sample submitter of test results electronically, by phone, or 
in writing.  This should be completed within 24-48 hours of test completion.  Additional 
parties, including the AVIC and State veterinary office, may also be notified of results 
given that an arrangement has been agreed upon between the diagnostic laboratory and 
additional party.  APHIS Animal Identification
Text Len: 1782
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 sample submitter of test results electronically, by phone, or 
in writing.  This should be completed within 24-48 hours of test completion.  Additional 
parties, including the AVIC and State veterinary office, may also be notified of results 
given that an arrangement has been agreed upon between the diagnostic laboratory and 
additional party.  APHIS Animal Identification Coordinators (AIC) may assist with 
sample delivery verification and troubleshooting.  Training of sample collectors is 
completed by AVIC offices and VS regional offices, and, at their discretion, state 
veterinary offices. It is the responsibility of the AVIC offices to monitor sample 
collectors in the relevant area for habitual poor sample collection technique. 
 
Animal Disposal 
 
Carcasses from negative animals are disposed of in compliance with Federal, State, and 
local laws.  Carcasses and offal from “inconclusive” or positive animals may be disposed 
of by one of the following: rendering for non-animal feed use by dedicated facilities, 
burial in a landfill, burial on-farm, alkaline digestion, or incineration.  Rendering 
facilities may refrigerate or freeze carcasses, or may proceed with rendering and hold 
batches of final products, pending test results.  Should a positive animal occur with the 
latter method, an indemnity would be supplied for the disposed batches of products.  
 
Clinical Case Definition 
 
Clinical case definitions are not applicable to the present surveillance methods.  Because 
clinical signs have such poor specificity and sensitivity for BSE diagnosis, and because 
the diagnostic assays used for BSE diagnosis are considered to have near perfect analytic 
sensitivity and specificity (i.e. cattle with detectable disease are reliably differentiated 
from cattle without
Text Len: 1801
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
inical Case Definition 
 
Clinical case definitions are not applicable to the present surveillance methods.  Because 
clinical signs have such poor specificity and sensitivity for BSE diagnosis, and because 
the diagnostic assays used for BSE diagnosis are considered to have near perfect analytic 
sensitivity and specificity (i.e. cattle with detectable disease are reliably differentiated 
from cattle without detectable disease), BSE diagnosis is solely based on laboratory 
 
 17
criteria.  The case definition used for surveillance is the laboratory case definition for 
BSE as defined by the most current version of NVSL document GPISOP0034. 
 
Laboratory Criteria for Diagnosis 
 
The diagnostic strategy implemented for BSE surveillance is described elsewhere (most 
current versions of NVSL protocols GPPISOP0027 and GPPISOP0034). 
 
ANALYSIS, REPORTING, AND PRESENTATION  
 
The NSU is the party primarily responsible for data analysis and reporting. Reports 
produced by the NSU for the Deputy Administrator of VS and his designates will include 
monthly reports used for program monitoring and oversight, and an annual summary 
report analogous to that produced at the conclusion of the Enhanced Surveillance 
program.  The annual summary report is intended to tally surveillance points derived 
from BSE surveillance efforts over the last 7 years using the OIE Code.  Additionally, 
this report will provide an estimate of BSE prevalence, and/or demonstrate freedom from 
disease in U.S. cattle. The information provided by the annual report may be further 
tabulated for public consumption at the request of the Deputy Administrator; however 
monthly reports are anticipated to remain for internal USDA use only.  Measures that will 
be portrayed by the monthly reports, in tabular and graphical format, include monthly
Text Len: 1834
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
/or demonstrate freedom from 
disease in U.S. cattle. The information provided by the annual report may be further 
tabulated for public consumption at the request of the Deputy Administrator; however 
monthly reports are anticipated to remain for internal USDA use only.  Measures that will 
be portrayed by the monthly reports, in tabular and graphical format, include monthly and 
cumulative numbers of targeted samples, non-targeted samples, “not detected, not obex” 
samples, and total samples stratified by collection site type, submission reason, and 
geographical area.  Monthly reports will be used to assess progress toward national 
sampling goals with respect to point totals.  
 
Data analysis will be performed throughout the Ongoing Surveillance to assess sampling 
progress. Data quality will be monitored periodically using an error-checking routine to 
identify information that is outside expected values or for key data that are missing. 
Samples that do not meet the targeted sampling criteria will be identified, and feedback 
will be provided through appropriate channels to sample collectors that submit non-
targeted samples. Many mechanisms are already in place in the existing BSE database 
that prevent common data entry errors and that require recording of important sample 
data.  
 
 
 18
REFERENCES 
 
1  An Estimate of the prevalence of BSE in the United States. USDA/APHIS, Centers for Epidemiology 
and Animal Health, National Surveillance Unit, April 2006. Accessed May 5, 2006 online at 
http://www.aphis.usda.gov/newsroom/hot_issues/bse/content/printable_version/BSEprevalence-
estimate4-26-06.pdf 
2  Appendix 3.8.4: Surveillance for bovine
Text Len: 1679
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Animal Health, National Surveillance Unit, April 2006. Accessed May 5, 2006 online at 
http://www.aphis.usda.gov/newsroom/hot_issues/bse/content/printable_version/BSEprevalence-
estimate4-26-06.pdf 
2  Appendix 3.8.4: Surveillance for bovine spongiform encephalopathy. In: Terrestrial animal health code, 
14th ed. Office International des Epizooties, Paris, 2005 
3  Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) response plan summary. USDA Animal and Plant Health 
Inspection Service and Food Safety and Inspection Service. Accessed May 5, 2006 online at: 
http://www.aphis.usda.gov/lpa/issues/bse/bsesum.pdf. 
4  BSE: Statistics - Youngest and oldest cases by year of onset - Great Britain (passive surveillance only). 
Department for Environment, Food, and Rural Affairs, 2005. Accessed May 5, 2006 online at: 
http://www.defra.gov.uk/animalh/bse/statistics/bse/yng-old.html. 
5  Cattle Final Estimates 1999-2003. USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service, 2004. Accessed May 
5, 2006 online at: http://usda.mannlib.cornell.edu/usda/reports/general/sb/sb989.pdf. 
6  Chapter 2.3.13: Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy. In: Terrestrial animal health code, 14th ed. Office 
International des Epizooties, Paris, 2005 
7  FDA bovine spongiform encephalopathy emergency response plan summary. U.S. Food and Drug 
Administ
Text Len: 1316
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
989.pdf. 
6  Chapter 2.3.13: Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy. In: Terrestrial animal health code, 14th ed. Office 
International des Epizooties, Paris, 2005 
7  FDA bovine spongiform encephalopathy emergency response plan summary. U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration, 2004. Accessed May 5, 2006 online at: 
http://www.fda.gov/oc/opacom/hottopics/bseplan/bseplan.html. 
8  Scientific report of the European Food Safety Authority on the BSE surveillance model (BSurvE) 
estabilished by the Community Reference Laboratory for TSE. European Food Safety Authority, 2004. 
Available online at: 
http://www.efsa.eu.int/science/tse_assessments/bse_tse/661/sr17_bsetse_bsurve_en1.pdf. 
9  Summary of BSE Enhanced Surveillance in the United States. USDA/APHIS, Center for Epidemiology 
and Animal Health, National Surveillance Unit, April 2006. Accessed May 5, 2006 online at 
http://www.aphis.usda.gov/newsroom/hot_issues/bse/content/printable_version/SummaryEnhancedBSE
-Surv4-26-06.pdf 
10  Aguzzi A, Heikenwalder M, Miele G: Progress and problems in the biology, diagnostics, and 
therapeutics of prion diseases. J Clin Invest 114: 153-160, 2004 
11  Anderson RM, Donnelly CA, Ferguson NM, Woolhouse MEJ, Watt CJ, Udy HJ, MaWhinney S, 
Dunstan SP,
Text Len: 1241
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ikenwalder M, Miele G: Progress and problems in the biology, diagnostics, and 
therapeutics of prion diseases. J Clin Invest 114: 153-160, 2004 
11  Anderson RM, Donnelly CA, Ferguson NM, Woolhouse MEJ, Watt CJ, Udy HJ, MaWhinney S, 
Dunstan SP, Southwood TRE, Wilesmith JW, Ryans JBM, Hionville LJ, Hillerton JE, Austin AR, 
Wells GAH: Transmission dynamics and epidemiology of BSE in British cattle. Nature 382: 779-788, 
1996 
12  Arnold ME, Wilesmith JW: Estimation of the age-dependent risk of infection to BSE of dairy cattle in 
Great Britain. Prev Vet Med 66: 35-47, 2004 
 
 19
13  Bolton DC, McKinley MP, Prusiner SB: Identification of a protein that purifies with the scrapie prion. 
Science 218: 1309-1311, 1982 
14  Borchelt DR, Scott M, Taraboulos A, Stahl N, Prusiner SB: Scrapie and cellular prion proteins differ in 
their kinetics of synthesis and topology in cultured cells. J Cell Biol 110: 743-752, 1990 
15  Bruce ME, Will RG, Ironside JW, McConnell I, Drummond D, Suttie A, McCardle L, Chree A, Hope J, 
Birkett C, Cousens SN, Fraser H, Bostock CJ: Transmissions to mice indicate that 'new variant' CJD is 
caused by the BSE agent. Nature 389: 498-501, 1997 
16  Bueler H, Aguzzi A, Sailer
Text Len: 1212
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, McCardle L, Chree A, Hope J, 
Birkett C, Cousens SN, Fraser H, Bostock CJ: Transmissions to mice indicate that 'new variant' CJD is 
caused by the BSE agent. Nature 389: 498-501, 1997 
16  Bueler H, Aguzzi A, Sailer A, Greiner RA, Auternried P, Aguet M, Weissmann C: Mice devoid of PrP 
are resistant to Scrapie. Cell 73: 1339-1347, 1993 
17  Cannon RM, Roe RT: Livestock Disease Surveys: A Field Manual for Veterinarians Australian Bureau 
of Animal Health, Canberra, 1982 
18  Casalone C, Zanusso G, Acutis P, Ferrari S, Capucci L, Tagliavini F, Monaco S, Caramelli M: 
Identification of a second bovine amyloidotic spongiform encephalopathy: Molecular similarities with 
sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101: 3065-3070, 2004 
19  Caughey B, Raymond GJ: The scrapie-associated form of PrP is made from a cell surface precursor that 
is both protease- and phospholipase-sensitive. J Biol Chem 266: 18217-18223, 1991 
20  Cohen JT, Duggar K, Gray GM, Kreindel S, Abdelrahman H, Habtemariam T, Oryang D, Tameru B: 
Evaluation of the potential for bovine spongiform encephalopathy in the United States. Harvard Center 
for Risk Analysis, harvard School of Public Health; and Center for Computational Epidemiology, 

Text Len: 1243
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
gar K, Gray GM, Kreindel S, Abdelrahman H, Habtemariam T, Oryang D, Tameru B: 
Evaluation of the potential for bovine spongiform encephalopathy in the United States. Harvard Center 
for Risk Analysis, harvard School of Public Health; and Center for Computational Epidemiology, 
College of Veterinary Medicine, Tuskegee University, 2001. Accessed May 5, 2006 online at: 
http://www.aphis.usda.gov/lpa/issues/bse/risk_assessment/mainreporttext.pdf. 
21  Collinge J, Sidle KCL, Meads J, Ironside JW, Hill AF: Molecular analysis of prion strain variation and 
the aetiology of 'new variant' CJD. Nature 383: 685-690, 1996 
22  Donnelly CA, Ghani AC: Analysis of the bovine spongiform encephalopathy maternal cohort study: 
evidence for direct maternal transmission. Appl Statist 46: 321-344, 1997 
23  Goldmann W, Hunter N, Martin T, Dawson M, Hope J: Different forms of bovine PrP gene have five or 
six copies of a short G-C rich element within the protein coding exon. J Gen Virol 72: 201-204, 1991 
24  Kaneko K, Peretz D, Pan K-M, Blochberger TC, Wille H, Gabizon R, Griffith OH, Cohen FE, Baldwin 
MA, Prusiner SB: Prion protein (PrP) synthetic peptides induce cellular PrP to acquire properties of the 
scrapie isoform. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 92: 11160-11164, 1995 
25  Kirkwood JK, Cunningham AA
Text Len: 1301
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, Wille H, Gabizon R, Griffith OH, Cohen FE, Baldwin 
MA, Prusiner SB: Prion protein (PrP) synthetic peptides induce cellular PrP to acquire properties of the 
scrapie isoform. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 92: 11160-11164, 1995 
25  Kirkwood JK, Cunningham AA: Epidemiological observations on spongiform encephalopathies in 
captive wild animals in the British Isles. Vet Rec 135: 296-303, 1994 
26  Kocisko DA, Come JH, Priola S, A., Chesebro B, Raymond GJ, Lansbury PT, Caughey B: Cell-free 
formation of protease-resistant prion protein. Nature 370: 471-474, 1994 
 
 20
27  Kubler E, Oesch B, Raeber A: Diagnosis of prion diseases. Br Med Bull 66: 267-279, 2003 
28  Kuczius T, Haist I, Groschup MH: Molecular analysis of bovine spongiform encephalopathy and 
scrapie strain variation. J Infect Dis 178: 693-699, 1998 
29  McKinley MP, Bolton DC, Prusiner SB: A protease-resistant protein is a structural component of the 
scrapie prion. Cell 35: 57-62, 1983 
30  NASS (2005) Cattle, National Agricultural Statistics Service, USDA.  Washington, D.C.  Released 
January 28, 2005, by the National Agricultural Statistics.  Service (NASS), Agricultural Statistics 
Board, U.S. Department of  Agriculture. Available 12/15/05 at: 
http://usda.mannlib.cornell.edu/reports/nassr/
Text Len: 1272
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, National Agricultural Statistics Service, USDA.  Washington, D.C.  Released 
January 28, 2005, by the National Agricultural Statistics.  Service (NASS), Agricultural Statistics 
Board, U.S. Department of  Agriculture. Available 12/15/05 at: 
http://usda.mannlib.cornell.edu/reports/nassr/livestock/pct-bb/catl0101.txt 
31  Phillips N, Bridgeman J, Ferguson-Smith M: The BSE Inquiry: the report. Her majesty's Stationery 
Office (HMSO) Publications Centre, 2000. Accessed May 5, 2006 online at: 
http://www.bseinquiry.gov.uk/report/volume2/toc.htm. 
32  Prusiner SB: Novel proteinaceous infectious particles cause scrapie. Science 216: 136-144, 1982 
33  Prusiner SB, Scott M, Foster D, Pan KM, Groth D, Mirenda C, Torchia M, Yang SL, Serban D, Carlson 
GA, Hoppe PC, Westaway D, DeArmond SJ: Transgenetic studies implicate interactions between 
homologous PrP isoforms in scrapie prion replication. Cell 63: 673-686, 1990 
34  Race RE, Jenny A, Sutton D: Scrapie infectivity and proteinase K-resistant prion protein in sheep 
placenta, brain, and lymph node: Implications for transmission and antemortem diagnosis. J Infect Dis 
178: 949-953, 1998 
35  Saegerman C, Speybroeck N, Roels S, Vanopdenbosch E, Thiry E, Berkvens D: Decision support tools 
for clinical diagnosis of disease in cows with suspected
Text Len: 1309
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 brain, and lymph node: Implications for transmission and antemortem diagnosis. J Infect Dis 
178: 949-953, 1998 
35  Saegerman C, Speybroeck N, Roels S, Vanopdenbosch E, Thiry E, Berkvens D: Decision support tools 
for clinical diagnosis of disease in cows with suspected bovine spongiform encephalopathy. J Clin 
Microbiol 42: 172-178, 2004 
36  Simmons MM, Harris P, Jeffrey M, Meek SC, Blamire IWH, Wells GAH: BSE in Great Britain: 
consistency of the neurohistopathological findings in two random annual samples of clinically suspect 
cases. Vet Rec 138: 175-177, 1996 
37  Taylor DM: Inactivation of transmissible degenerative encephalopathy agents: A review. Vet J 159: 10-
17, 2000 
38  Wells GAH, Scott AC, Johnson CT, Gunning RF, Hancock RD, Jeffrey M, Dawson M, Bradley R: A 
novel progressive spongiform encephalopathy in cattle. Vet Rec 121: 419-420, 1987 
39  Wells GAH, Wilesmith JW: The neuropathology and epidemiology of bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy. Brain Pathol 5: 91-103, 1995 
40  Wilesmith JW, Ryan JBM, Atkinson MJ: Bovine spongiform encephalopathy: epidemiological studies 
of the origin. Vet Rec 128: 199-203, 1991 
 
 21
41  Wilesmith JW, Ryan JBM, Hueston WD: Bovine spongiform encephalopathy: case-control studies of 
calf feeding practices and meat and bone meal inclusion in proprietary concentrates. Res
Text Len: 1339
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 spongiform encephalopathy: epidemiological studies 
of the origin. Vet Rec 128: 199-203, 1991 
 
 21
41  Wilesmith JW, Ryan JBM, Hueston WD: Bovine spongiform encephalopathy: case-control studies of 
calf feeding practices and meat and bone meal inclusion in proprietary concentrates. Res Vet Sci 52: 
325, 1992 
42  Wilesmith JW, Ryan JBM, Hueston WD, Hoinville LJ: Bovine spongiform encephalopathy: 
epidemiological features 1985 to 1990. Vet Rec 130: 90-94, 1992 
43  Wilesmith JW, Wells GAH, Cranwell MP, Ryan JBM: Bovine spongiform encephalopathy: 
Epidemiological studies. Vet Rec 123: 638-644, 1988 
44  Wilesmith JW, Wells GAH, Ryan JB, Gavier-Widen D, Simmons MM: A cohort study to examine 
maternally-associated risk factors for bovine spongiform encephalopathy. Vet Rec 141: 239-243, 1997 
45  Wilesmith J, Morris R, Stevenson M, Cannon R, Prattley D, and Benard H (2004) Development of a 
Method for the Evaluation of National Surveillance Data and Optimization of National Surveillance 
Strategies for Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy. Weybridge, England, European Union TSE 
Community Reference Laboratory, Veterinary Laboratories Agency.   
46  Will RG, Ironside JW, Zeidler M, Cousens SN, Estiberio K, Alperovitch A, Poser S, Pocchiari M, 
Hofman A, Smith PG: A new variant of Creutzfeldt
Text Len: 1305
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
bridge, England, European Union TSE 
Community Reference Laboratory, Veterinary Laboratories Agency.   
46  Will RG, Ironside JW, Zeidler M, Cousens SN, Estiberio K, Alperovitch A, Poser S, Pocchiari M, 
Hofman A, Smith PG: A new variant of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in the UK. Lancet 347: 921-925, 
1996 
47  Wyatt JM, Pearson GR, Smerdon TN, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Wells GAH, Wilesmith JW: Naturally 
occurring scrapie-like spongiform encephalopathy in five domestic cats. Vet Rec 129: 233-236, 1991 
48  Yamakawa Y, Hagiwara K, Nohtomi K, Nakamura Y, Nishijima M, higuchi Y, Sato Y, Sata T: 
Atypical proteinase K-resistant prion protein (PrPres) observed in an apparently healthy 23-month-old 
Holstein steer. Jpn J Infect Dis 56: 221-222, 2003 
 
 
Text Len: 749
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
