 
1 
 
 
December 20, 2017 
VIA EMAIL AND U.S. MAIL 
 
Connie Williams, Chief, Program Evaluation and Decision Support 
Quality of Information Officer 
USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
4700 River Road, Unit 120 
Riverdale, MD 20737 
Connie.M.Williams@aphis.usda.gov 
(301) 851-3087 
 
RE: COMPLAINT ABOUT INFORMATION QUALITY 
 
Dear Ms. Williams, 
 
 PEER respectfully submits this complaint about Data Quality. 
 
 Pursuant to Section (b)(2)(B) of the Data Quality Act of 2000 (“DQA”), Section 515 of 
Public Law 106-554, and the Correction of Information mechanism of the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture Information Quality Guidelines, Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility 
(“PEER”) hereby challenges data manipulation and conclusions drawn therefrom by the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture (“USDA”), as detailed infra. PEER is especially concerned about the 
government’s dissemination of faulty research that has been erroneously used to justify harmful, 
commonplace, and excessive coyote control and extermination policies throughout federal lands 
despite more recent, thorough, and peer-reviewed scientific studies demonstrating the importance 
of large mammalian carnivores contributing to ecological health and stability. Specifically, 
PEER challenges the government’s continued reliance upon the USDA-funded study Connolly, 
G.E., and W.M. Longhurst, 1975, The effects of control on coyote populations: A simulation 
model, University of California, Division of Agricultural Sciences Bulletin, Volume 1872, 37 pp. 
Text Len: 1554
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ores contributing to ecological health and stability. Specifically, 
PEER challenges the government’s continued reliance upon the USDA-funded study Connolly, 
G.E., and W.M. Longhurst, 1975, The effects of control on coyote populations: A simulation 
model, University of California, Division of Agricultural Sciences Bulletin, Volume 1872, 37 pp. 
(hereinafter “Connolly and Longhurst study”). 
 
The USDA has consistently used this study for over 40 years, despite its established 
flaws and disputed findings, to justify large-scale coyote extermination efforts – even though the 
study’s own findings stated that eradication efforts were not an effective means of preventing 
depredation. In addition to being used to justify large-scale coyote control (i.e., killing 

 
2 
 
programs), this obscure (i.e., a small agricultural bulletin) and non-peer reviewed study has been 
cited and utilized in a variety of USDA documents over the years to justify a variety of agency 
actions related to coyote management. See, e.g., Paul L. Hegdal et al., Hazards to Wildlife 
Associated with 1080 Baiting for California Ground Squirrels, USDA National Wildlife 
Research Center – Staff Publications (1979);  Guy E. Connolly, The Effects of Control on Coyote 
Populations: Another Look, Symposium Proceedings—Coyotes in the Southwest: A 
Compendium of Our Knowledge 23 (1995); Kathleen A. Fagerstone and Gail Keirn, Wildlife 
Services—A Leader in Developing Tools and Techniques for Managing Carnivores, USDA 
National Wildlife Research Center – Staff Publications (2012); Eric Gese, Demographic and 
Spatial Responses of Coyotes to Changes in Food and Explo
Text Len: 1652
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
: A 
Compendium of Our Knowledge 23 (1995); Kathleen A. Fagerstone and Gail Keirn, Wildlife 
Services—A Leader in Developing Tools and Techniques for Managing Carnivores, USDA 
National Wildlife Research Center – Staff Publications (2012); Eric Gese, Demographic and 
Spatial Responses of Coyotes to Changes in Food and Exploitation, Wildlife Damage 
Management Conferences—Proceedings 131 (2005); John L. Gittleman et al., “References” for 
Carnivore Conservation, USDA National Wildlife Research Center – Staff Publications (2001);  
Gary Lee Nunley, Present and Historical Bobcat Population Trends in New Mexico and the 
West, Proceedings of the 8th Vertebrate Pest Conference 177, 180 (1978); Stewart W. Breck et 
al., Evaluating Lethal and Non-Lethal Management Options for Urban Coyotes (2016); William 
C. Pitt et al., An Individual-Based Model of Canid Populations: Modelling Territoriality and 
Social Structure (2003); USDA, 5 Year Environmental Monitoring Review for Predator Damage 
Management in Montana: FY 2002 through FY 2006 (2007).  
 
Furthermore, USDA has relied upon this study for justification of coyote eradication 
efforts or large scale control (i.e., killing) programs in numerous Environmental Assessments 
and Findings of No Significant Impact under the National Environmental Policy Act, 42 U.S.C. § 
4321, et seq (“NEPA”). This includes, but is not by any means limited to, Final EA:  Predator 
Damage and Conflict Management in Idaho (2016); Final EA: Reducing Coyote Damage to 
Livestock and Other Resources in Louisiana (2016); EA: Mammal Damage Management in the 
Commonwealth
Text Len: 1611
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. § 
4321, et seq (“NEPA”). This includes, but is not by any means limited to, Final EA:  Predator 
Damage and Conflict Management in Idaho (2016); Final EA: Reducing Coyote Damage to 
Livestock and Other Resources in Louisiana (2016); EA: Mammal Damage Management in the 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts (2015); EA: Reducing Mammal Damage in the State of North 
Carolina (2015); EA: Mammal Damage Management in the State of Rhode Island (2014); EA: 
Mammal Damage Management in Arkansas (2013); Decision and Finding of No Significant 
Impact: Reducing Mammal Damage through an Integrated Wildlife Damage Management 
Program in the State of New Jersey (2004); Decision and Finding of No Significant Impact for 
Management of Coyote, Dog, and Red Fox on Livestock in the Commonwealth of Virginia 
(2002); Environmental Assessment and Decision/Finding of No Significant Impact for Predator 
Damage Management in the College Station Animal Damage Control District Texas (1997).  
While USDA guidelines limit challenge of material used in NEPA documents to the public 
comment period for each NEPA document, it is evident from the recent and continued use of this 
study in justifying coyote eradication and control efforts that the study is being disseminated by 
the USDA and is clearly influential in both state and federal wildlife agency decision and policy-
making, despite its faulty nature.  
 
USDA’s use of the Connolly study violates the requirements of the Data Quality Act and 
as such the study should be removed from use by the agency and notice of its discontinued use 
be distributed among the USDA, Department of Interior (“DOI”) and state game agencies still 
utilizing this study to justify coyote hunting policies and control strategies.
Text Len: 1752
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
USDA’s use of the Connolly study violates the requirements of the Data Quality Act and 
as such the study should be removed from use by the agency and notice of its discontinued use 
be distributed among the USDA, Department of Interior (“DOI”) and state game agencies still 
utilizing this study to justify coyote hunting policies and control strategies. 
 
3 
 
 
 According to the Information Quality Guidelines, affected persons may avail themselves 
of multiple methods for notifying the USDA of complaints.  See USDA, Office of the Chief 
Information Officer, Information Quality Guidelines: Correction of Information, available at 
https://www.ocio.usda.gov/policy-directives-records-forms/guidelines-quality-
information/correction-information.  In accordance with those guidelines, PEER has mailed and 
emailed this complaint to the stated addresses and directed the complaint to Connie Williams, 
Chief Information Officer for the USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service. See id.  
APHIS includes Wildlife Services, the primary USDA component disseminating the Connelly 
and Longhurst study. 
 
I. CHALLENGED INFORMATION DOES NOT COMPLY WITH THE INFORMATION 
QUALITY GUIDELINES 
 
 a. Legal Basis for Data Quality Act Challenge 
 
 Section 515 of the Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act of 2001 (PL 
106-544, H.R. 5658) directs the Office of Management and Budget (“OMB”) to issue 
government-wide guidelines that “provide policy and procedural guidance to Federal agencies 
for ensuring and maximizing the quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of information 
(including statistical information) disseminated by Federal agencies.” OMB published final 
guidelines
Text Len: 1703
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. 5658) directs the Office of Management and Budget (“OMB”) to issue 
government-wide guidelines that “provide policy and procedural guidance to Federal agencies 
for ensuring and maximizing the quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of information 
(including statistical information) disseminated by Federal agencies.” OMB published final 
guidelines to implement Section 515 in the Federal Register on September 28, 2001, 66 Fed. 
Reg. 49718, (Sep. 28, 2001), and subsequently updated these guidelines on February 22, 2002, 
67 Fed. Reg. 8452 (Feb. 22, 2002). 
 
 OMB’s guidelines direct that Federal agencies “shall develop a process for reviewing the 
quality (including the objectivity, utility, and integrity) of information before it is disseminated. 
Agencies shall treat information quality as integral to every step of an agency’s development of 
information, including creation, collection, maintenance, and dissemination.” 67 Fed. Reg. 8452, 
8459 (Feb. 22, 2002). Furthermore, “[t]o facilitate public review, agencies shall establish 
administrative mechanisms allowing affected persons to seek and obtain, where appropriate, 
timely correction of information maintained and disseminated by the agency that does not 
comply with OMB or agency guidelines. These administrative mechanisms shall be flexible, 
appropriate to the nature and timeliness of the disseminated information, and incorporated into 
agency information resources management and administrative practices.” Id. 
  
 The purpose of the Data Quality Act was to ensure that the government disseminated the 
best quality information. See 66 Fed. Reg. 49718, 49718 (Sep. 28, 2001). OMB guidelines 
require a basic standard of quality. 67 Fed. Reg
Text Len: 1729
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 information, and incorporated into 
agency information resources management and administrative practices.” Id. 
  
 The purpose of the Data Quality Act was to ensure that the government disseminated the 
best quality information. See 66 Fed. Reg. 49718, 49718 (Sep. 28, 2001). OMB guidelines 
require a basic standard of quality. 67 Fed. Reg. 8452, 8458 (Feb. 22, 2002). They also require 
that each agency adopt guidelines appropriate for the information they disseminate. Id.  In this 
case, the Department of the Agriculture’s guidelines govern the challenge.  USDA, Office of the 
 
4 
 
Chief Information Officer, Information Quality Activities.1 The Department stated therein that it 
will make sure that information disseminated is accurate, reliable, and unbiased, and will “treat 
information quality as integral to every step in their development of information, including 
creation, collection, maintenance, and dissemination.”  USDA Guidelines, Information Quality 
Activities, IQA Main.    
 
The data disseminated by the USDA must meet requirements of objectivity, utility, and 
integrity. Id.  To fulfill agency objectivity requirements, agency information must be 
“substantively accurate, reliable, and unbiased” and the agency must identify such information 
for public review of its objectivity.  Id. The USDA assesses the utility of a study based upon its 
internal review of usefulness of the information and requires that disseminated information is 
accessible to all persons. Id. 
 
 Among the other s tandards, the USDA guidelines state that as a general matter, 
scientific and research information that has been subjected to formal, independent, external 
peer review is regarded as presumptively objective.  USDA Guidelines, Information
Text Len: 1765
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
internal review of usefulness of the information and requires that disseminated information is 
accessible to all persons. Id. 
 
 Among the other s tandards, the USDA guidelines state that as a general matter, 
scientific and research information that has been subjected to formal, independent, external 
peer review is regarded as presumptively objective.  USDA Guidelines, Information 
Quality Activities, Scientific Research.  For the peer review process, the USDA guidelines 
require that one or more of the following procedures be used for influential studies:2  
  
1. Conduct a peer review that meets the standards recommended by the OMB 
Bulletin. 
 
i. Where appropriate, subject the information to formal, independent, 
external peer review to ensure its objectivity. If data and analytic 
results have been subjected to such a review, the information may 
generally be presumed to be of acceptable objectivity.  However, in 
accordance with the OMB standard, this presumption is rebuttable 
based on a persuasive showing by a petitioner in a particular instance, 
although the burden of proof is on the complainant.  
 
ii. If agen cy-sponsored peer review is employed to help satisfy the 
objectivity standard, the review process should meet the general 
criteria for competent and credible peer review recommended by 
OMB.  OMB recommends that (a) peer reviewers be selected 
primarily on t he basis of necessary technical expertise, (b) peer 
reviewers be expected to disclose to agencies prior technical/policy 
positions they may have taken on issues at hand, (c) peer reviewers be 
expected to disclose to agencies their sources of personal and 
                       
Text Len: 1689
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 basis of necessary technical expertise, (b) peer 
reviewers be expected to disclose to agencies prior technical/policy 
positions they may have taken on issues at hand, (c) peer reviewers be 
expected to disclose to agencies their sources of personal and 
                                                           
1 Available at https://www.ocio.usda.gov/policy-directives-records-forms/information-quality-activities   
2 The challenged Connolly and Longhurst study meets the influential standard as it has been the definitive study 
used by USDA for the past 40 years to establish lethal control policies and has been used by the U.S. Department of 
Interior and state game agencies. 
 
5 
 
institutional funding (private or public sector), and (d) peer reviews 
be conducted in an open and rigorous manner. 
 
2. Confirm that the information to be released has been peer reviewed by a 
reputable scientific or professional journal, and the journal has agreed to publish 
the same information.  
 
3. Conduct an internal review, which for the purposes of establishing 
transparency, ensures that the report or research product clearly states what the 
information and data are, how they were obtained, and any reservati ons or 
limitations on their use.  
   
USDA Peer Review Implementation Guidelines at 5-6.3 The presumption that peer-reviewed 
material is objective can be rebutted, and non-peer reviewed studies are not considered to be 
presumptively objective
Text Len: 1472
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

information and data are, how they were obtained, and any reservati ons or 
limitations on their use.  
   
USDA Peer Review Implementation Guidelines at 5-6.3 The presumption that peer-reviewed 
material is objective can be rebutted, and non-peer reviewed studies are not considered to be 
presumptively objective.  Id; see also 67 Fed. Reg. 8452, 8459 (Feb. 22, 2002).   
 
 The Information Quality Guidelines describe how a challenge to the quality of 
information must proceed.  USDA Guidelines, Correction of Information.  The challenge must 
have six elements: a statement that the submittal is under USDA’s Information Quality 
Guidelines, a specific reference to the information being challenged, a statement from the 
complainant describing why the information does not satisfy the Department’s or OMB’s 
guidelines, the ways in which the complainant is affected by the information, a recommendation 
and justification for how the information should be corrected, and the name, address and other 
contact information of the complainant.  Id.  All these requirements are satisfied in this letter.   
 
 PEER’s name, address, phone number, fax number and email address is provided, the 
specific study is cited above, and the complainant is affected in ways described in Part III of this 
letter.  Additionally, the challenged information violates the standards of data quality because it 
lacks the baseline reliability quality required by statute.  “Quality” as a term encompasses utility, 
objectivity, and integrity.  67 Fed. Reg. 8452, 8459 (Feb. 22, 2002).  As it relates to quality, 
utility refers to “the usefulness of the information to its intended users
Text Len: 1673
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 standards of data quality because it 
lacks the baseline reliability quality required by statute.  “Quality” as a term encompasses utility, 
objectivity, and integrity.  67 Fed. Reg. 8452, 8459 (Feb. 22, 2002).  As it relates to quality, 
utility refers to “the usefulness of the information to its intended users, including the public. In 
assessing the usefulness of information that the agency disseminates to the public, the agency 
needs to consider the uses of the information not only from the perspective of the agency but also 
from the perspective of the public.”  Id. (emphasis added). Furthermore, “when transparency of 
information is relevant to assessing the information’s usefulness from the public’s perspective, 
the agency must take care to ensure that transparency has been addressed in its review of the 
information.” Id. In this case, the information challenged herein is of limited utility due to its 
age, lack of transparency, and the numerous recent peer-reviewed publications rebutting its 
erroneous conclusions.  It can no longer reasonably be used to inform the government’s 
carnivore control policy.  Furthermore, even if a challenged study has been through the peer 
review process (which this study and its 1995 review by its principal researcher do not appear to 
                                                           
3 USDA, Office of the Chief Information Officer, USDA’s Peer Review Guidelines, available at 
https://www.ocio.usda.gov/document/usdas-peer
Text Len: 1500
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                      
3 USDA, Office of the Chief Information Officer, USDA’s Peer Review Guidelines, available at 
https://www.ocio.usda.gov/document/usdas-peer-review-guidelines.  
 
6 
 
have been), its presumption of objectivity may be rebutted with a showing by a petitioner.  67 
Fed. Reg. 8452, 8459 (Feb. 22, 2002).  The information provided by this study is not reliable or 
accurate; thus even if it were peer-reviewed, the presumption in its favor would be rebutted.   
 
 
 b. Issues with the Quality of the USDA Research 
 
The Connolly and Longhurst study lacks utility for USDA’s intended purpose of evaluating and 
authorizing large-scale coyote extermination. 
 
 By repeatedly using the Connolly and Longhurst study for more than 40 years, USDA 
continues to rely on its findings as scientific evidence justifying large-scale coyote extermination 
programs, killing 76,859 coyotes in 2016 alone.4 The study has been relied on to support a claim 
of population resiliency in explosives and poison usage assessments, population modeling 
publications, NEPA documents for lethal control programs, and efficacy reviews for various 
carnivore management tactics, as well as a variety of other agency documents. In other words, 
USDA has justified exterminating coyotes on the basis of the study’s questionable conclusion 
that coyote populations rebound after major extermination events – while ignoring the ultimate 
conclusion of the study that lethal management of coyotes is not
Text Len: 1512
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and efficacy reviews for various 
carnivore management tactics, as well as a variety of other agency documents. In other words, 
USDA has justified exterminating coyotes on the basis of the study’s questionable conclusion 
that coyote populations rebound after major extermination events – while ignoring the ultimate 
conclusion of the study that lethal management of coyotes is not an effective method for 
reducing coyote populations or depredation events. Not only has USDA employed this study for 
internal purposes, it has disseminated this study to state game agencies and the DOI for use in 
their hunting program environmental assessments and planning materials.  
 
However, it is abundantly clear that this study is no longer useful, due to its age and 
countless errors (discussed in detail below). Even apart from these flaws, USDA misuses the 
study to justify a practice that the study actually recommends against. The study that USDA uses 
to justify broad lethal control of coyotes actually describes the futility of killing coyotes for 
management purposes since the species will simply rebound in numbers in a short period of time 
(<3 years) due to density dependent responsive reproduction. In fact, the authors finished their 
paper by concluding that they “emphatically do not recommend eradication as the preferred 
coyote management strategy . . . Killing coyotes unselectively . . . is not a very feasible means of 
reducing populations over broad geographical areas.” Connolly and Longhurst at 32-33 
(emphasis added). Rather than providing justifications for coyote killing, the authors 
“suggest[ed] that other means should be found to reduce coyote depredations, and that better 
understanding of coyote population dynamics is required.” Connolly and Longhurst at 33. We 
now understand more about
Text Len: 1828
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
olly and Longhurst at 32-33 
(emphasis added). Rather than providing justifications for coyote killing, the authors 
“suggest[ed] that other means should be found to reduce coyote depredations, and that better 
understanding of coyote population dynamics is required.” Connolly and Longhurst at 33. We 
now understand more about coyote population dynamics. 
 
Moreover, this study, which is relied upon so heavily by not just the USDA but also the 
DOI and numerous state game agencies,5 is based on speculative – not empirical – data from the 
                                                           
4 See https://www.aphis.usda.gov/wildlife_damage/pdr/PDR-G_Report.php?fld=&fld_val= 
5 As state game agencies often rely upon federal data and research to establish lethal control guidelines and hunting 
regulations, USDA and DOI reliance upon this study has significantly impacted state management of wildlife. See, 
e.g., Strawberry Valley Greater Sage-Grouse (Centrocercus Urophasianus) Local Conservation Plan (2006); 
 
7 
 
1970s. In fact, when discussing birth and death functions, the authors feel compelled to 
“reemphasize that the form of these functions is largely speculative.” Connolly and Longhurst at 
15 (emphasis added). This paper is over 40 years old and reams of scientific data on coyotes and 
predators in general have been produced since then.6  
 

Text Len: 1378
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 when discussing birth and death functions, the authors feel compelled to 
“reemphasize that the form of these functions is largely speculative.” Connolly and Longhurst at 
15 (emphasis added). This paper is over 40 years old and reams of scientific data on coyotes and 
predators in general have been produced since then.6  
 
 It is questionable at best, and dishonest at worst, for USDA and other agencies to 
continue to rely on this 42 year old model, based on “largely speculative” data. Even the authors 
seem to acknowledge the unsuitability of using their work to justify lethal control by saying, 
“[s]ince reliable estimates of coyote numbers are notoriously difficult to obtain, the information 
needed to plan intelligent predator management programs is not usually available. In most areas 
we simply do not know how the control kill relates to the size of the population, or even whether 
coyote numbers are increasing or decreasing.” Connolly and Longhurst at 27. Not only does 
recent research demonstrate that lethal control programs have detrimental ecological effects, but 
it reinforces the missed message of the Connolly and Longhurst study that lethal control of 
carnivores is not an effective tactic for combating livestock depredation. See Treves, A., M. 
Krofel and J. McManus (2016), Predator control should not be a shot in the dark, Frontiers in 
Ecology and the Environment 14: 380–388; Van Eeden, L. M., et al. (2017), Managing conflict 
between large carnivores and livestock, Conservation Biology, doi: 10.1111/cobi.12959.  
Considering the fact that a tremendous volume of coyote research and data has emerged since the 
1970s (including birth rates,
Text Len: 1685
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ecology and the Environment 14: 380–388; Van Eeden, L. M., et al. (2017), Managing conflict 
between large carnivores and livestock, Conservation Biology, doi: 10.1111/cobi.12959.  
Considering the fact that a tremendous volume of coyote research and data has emerged since the 
1970s (including birth rates, age ratios, survival, effects of hybridization, etc.), the Connolly and 
Longhurst study has been rendered useless and antiquated for purposes of scientifically sound 
coyote control and hunting decisions.  
 
Furthermore, the Connolly and Longhurst study is cited by USDA materials to 
erroneously reach broad conclusions about management of coyotes in the eastern U.S., such as 
the acceptability of large scale lethal management programs7 and the efficacy of lethal control8, 
despite this region possessing a different population of canids, namely the eastern coyote, or 
coywolf, a hybridized subspecies with only roughly 60% shared genetics with western Canis 
latrans. Neither PEER nor its coyote researcher collaborators have been able to locate any 
USDA, or more specifically Wildlife Services, documents that effectively address the 
reproductive and behavioral differences between the western Canis latrans and the eastern 
coyote, whose reproductive rates and behavior often resembles the wolf, Canis spp. (lycaon or 
lupus), with which it shares roughly 30% of its genetics. This manifests in the eastern coywolf 
possessing delayed sexual maturity, smaller litter size, larger territories, and differences in prey 
preference when compared to western Canis latrans. See Way, J.G. and Lynn, W.S., 
Northeastern coyote/coywolf taxonomy and admixture: A meta-analysis,
Text Len: 1689
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 of its genetics. This manifests in the eastern coywolf 
possessing delayed sexual maturity, smaller litter size, larger territories, and differences in prey 
preference when compared to western Canis latrans. See Way, J.G. and Lynn, W.S., 
Northeastern coyote/coywolf taxonomy and admixture: A meta-analysis, Canid Biology & 
Conservation 19(1): 1-7 (2016); http://canids.org/CBC/19/Northeastern_coyote_taxonomy.pdf. 
                                                           
Nevada Animal Damage Control Program 2005 Work Plan for Nevada Public Lands  (2005); Southeastern Arizona 
Wild Turkey Management Plan (2000). 
6 See Appendix. A. 
7 See e.g., Decision and Finding of No Significant Impact: Reducing Mammal Damage through an Integrated 
Wildlife Damage Management Program in the State of New Jersey (2004). 
8 See, e.g., Stewart W. Breck et al., Evaluating Lethal and Non-Lethal Management Options for Urban Coyotes 
(2016). 
 
8 
 
Therefore, the challenged study lacks utility in predator management decisions and studies for 
large parts of the U.S. where hybridized eastern coyote/coywolf populations have replaced Canis 
latrans populations; yet USDA usage and dissemination of this material does not reflect these 
differences. 
 
USDA’s use of the Connolly and Longhurst study lacks objectivity because the study is 
inaccurate and unreliable
Text Len: 1360
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
large parts of the U.S. where hybridized eastern coyote/coywolf populations have replaced Canis 
latrans populations; yet USDA usage and dissemination of this material does not reflect these 
differences. 
 
USDA’s use of the Connolly and Longhurst study lacks objectivity because the study is 
inaccurate and unreliable.   
 
 Despite being outdated and not peer reviewed, the Connolly and Longhurst study 
continues to be used to support decisions by federal and state agricultural departments and 
wildlife agencies promoting the unlimited slaughter of coyotes nationwide. Specifically, agency 
studies and decisions are justified by Connolly and Longhurst’s speculative finding that “coyotes 
through compensatory reproduction can withstand an annual control level of 70%.” Connolly 
and Longhurst at 19.9 Yet, while agencies continue to rely on this study, the substance remains 
inaccurate, unreliable, and biased. Inaccuracies throughout the study affect both models and 
conclusions. This is seen early on in the study when the author states that “in the model, both 
control and natural losses are calculated once each year[,]” However, earlier in the paper, it is 
mentioned that losses occur throughout the year, making reliance on data calculated once a year 
unsound. Connolly & Longhurst at 3. While it is just a model, having only one mortality event is 
highly inaccurate given that deaths occur throughout the year (Parker 1995), and such an 
inaccuracy could clearly affect population models. See G.R. Parker, Eastern Coyote: The Story 
of Its Success (1995), Nimbus Publishing, Halifax, NS. 
 
 Recent research and data on coyotes has revealed the information set forth in the 
Conn
Text Len: 1703
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

highly inaccurate given that deaths occur throughout the year (Parker 1995), and such an 
inaccuracy could clearly affect population models. See G.R. Parker, Eastern Coyote: The Story 
of Its Success (1995), Nimbus Publishing, Halifax, NS. 
 
 Recent research and data on coyotes has revealed the information set forth in the 
Connolly and Longhurst study to be even more inaccurate than it appeared at the time. Figure 3 
of the study, charting coyote litter size related to coyote density, is just one example of such an 
inaccuracy revealed by recent data. Connolly & Longhurst at 10. The corresponding text states 
that coyote litter size increases with additional control. While Knowlton (1972) noted that 
average litter size varied inversely with density of coyotes whereby lower populations of coyotes 
(i.e., ones that were subjected to human lethal control) had higher litter sizes (and cited in 
Connolly and Longhurst 1975), more recently, Crabtree and Sheldon (1999) suggested that litter 
survival and not litter size at birth is the major reproductive parameter that responds to human 
exploitation in a density-dependent manner because litter size varied little with prey abundance. 
                                                           
9 See USDA, 5 Year Environmental Monitoring Review for Predator Damage Management in Montana: FY 2002 
through FY 2006 (2007), 3-4; Paul L. Hegdal et al., Hazards to Wildlife Associated with 1080 Baiting for California 
Ground Squirrels, USDA National Wildlife Research Center – Staff Publications (1979)
Text Len: 1565
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
            
9 See USDA, 5 Year Environmental Monitoring Review for Predator Damage Management in Montana: FY 2002 
through FY 2006 (2007), 3-4; Paul L. Hegdal et al., Hazards to Wildlife Associated with 1080 Baiting for California 
Ground Squirrels, USDA National Wildlife Research Center – Staff Publications (1979) at 34. See also, Final EA:  
Predator Damage and Conflict Management in Idaho (2016); Final EA: Reducing Coyote Damage to Livestock and 
Other Resources in Louisiana (2016); EA: Mammal Damage Management in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
(2015); EA: Reducing Mammal Damage in the State of North Carolina (2015); EA: Mammal Damage Management 
in the State of Rhode Island (2014); EA: Mammal Damage Management in Arkansas (2013); Decision and Finding 
of No Significant Impact: Reducing Mammal Damage through an Integrated Wildlife Damage Management 
Program in the State of New Jersey (2004); Decision and Finding of No Significant Impact for Management of 
Coyote, Dog, and Red Fox on Livestock in the Commonwealth of Virginia (2002); Environmental Assessment and 
Decision/Finding of No Significant Impact for Predator Damage Management in the College Station Animal 
Damage Control District Texas (1997). 
 
9 
 
See R.L. Crabtree and J.W. Sheldon, Coyotes and Canid Coexistence in Yellowstone (1999); F.F. 
Knowlton, Preliminary Interpretations of Coyote Population Mechanics with Some Management 
Implications, 36 J. Wildlife Mgmt. 369 (1972). In sum, recent research clearly shows that litter 
survival over time is a more robust indicator of mortality rates than litter birth size. This is 
particularly relevant to the contents of the challenged study as coyote populations
Text Len: 1701
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
Knowlton, Preliminary Interpretations of Coyote Population Mechanics with Some Management 
Implications, 36 J. Wildlife Mgmt. 369 (1972). In sum, recent research clearly shows that litter 
survival over time is a more robust indicator of mortality rates than litter birth size. This is 
particularly relevant to the contents of the challenged study as coyote populations are self-
regulated by prey availability and territoriality (i.e., guarding home range areas from other 
packs); as a result, litter survival is directly related to artificially lowered population densities 
caused by lethal control. 
 
This simply means that, on average, coyote litter size changes minimally following an 
increase in mortality, but litter survival over time does improve with increased mortality, which 
likely compensates for reduced survival of adults. A simple mechanism to explain this is that 
there is a greater energy cost to successfully raise offspring than to produce them, and increased 
mortality of adults likely causes the food supply to increase in an area, allowing for greater litter 
survival. While it is important to stress how vigorously coyote populations compensate for 
population reductions, this is a common characteristic for a density dependent (i.e., territorial) 
species. See R. Crabtree, Scientific Opinion Letter for Predator Defense: “What Effect does 
Reduction of Coyotes (older than 6 months) have on the Remaining Population?” (1997, revised 
2012), http://predatordefense.org/docs/coyotes_letter_Dr_Crabtree_06-21-12.pdf.  However, the 
bottom line is that if litter sizes do not increase to the degree stated in Figure 3, then there will be 
less coyotes born and hence a smaller population size and population recovery under Connolly 
and Longh
Text Len: 1777
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
predatordefense.org/docs/coyotes_letter_Dr_Crabtree_06-21-12.pdf.  However, the 
bottom line is that if litter sizes do not increase to the degree stated in Figure 3, then there will be 
less coyotes born and hence a smaller population size and population recovery under Connolly 
and Longhurst’s model.  
 
Furthermore, it is evident that the Connolly and Longhurst study lacks an acceptable level 
of objectivity because the experimental design of the study specifically seeks to model how to 
effectively eradicate coyote populations for the benefit of livestock producers.  Therefore, the 
study has a built-in bias favoring eradication.  It also lacks the benefit of a growing body of 
subsequently developed evidence of the negative ecological and behavioral consequences of 
carnivore hunting and eradication programs. See Estes, J.A., et al. 2011. Trophic downgrading of 
planet earth. Science 333: 301–306; Gilbert et al. 2016, Socioeconomic benefits of large 
carnivore recolonization through reduced wildlife-vehicle collisions, Conservation Letters DOI: 
10.1111/conl.12280; Ripple et al. 2014, Status and ecological effects of the world’s largest 
carnivores, Science 343: 151–162; Robinson et al. 2008, Sink populations in large carnivore 
management: cougar demography in a hunted population, Ecological Applications 18(4): 1028-
1037. Hunting pressure on large carnivore populations can have disruptive effects on social 
structure, movement patterns, and behavior, which can undermine their ecological role as 
predators. Ordiz et al., 2013, Saving large carnivores, but losing the apex predator? Biological 
Cons
Text Len: 1630
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
gar demography in a hunted population, Ecological Applications 18(4): 1028-
1037. Hunting pressure on large carnivore populations can have disruptive effects on social 
structure, movement patterns, and behavior, which can undermine their ecological role as 
predators. Ordiz et al., 2013, Saving large carnivores, but losing the apex predator? Biological 
Conservation 168: 128-133. Moreover, heavily hunted wolves have higher stress and 
reproductive steroids/hormones than individuals with lower hunting pressure, supporting the 
theory of social and physiological consequences to sentient animals, like canids, of human-
caused mortality such as sport hunting. Bryan, H., et al., Heavily hunted wolves have higher 
stress and reproductive steroids than wolves with lower hunting pressure, Functional Ecology, 
2014, 1-10, doi: 10.1111/1365-2435.12354. Lethal control programs targeting coyotes can also 
disrupt population dynamics for other, smaller predators, resulting in increased predation and 
nest failure for species like the greater sage-grouse. Mezquida et al., 2006, Sage-Grouse and 
 
10 
 
Indirect Interaction:  Potential Implications of Coyote Control on Sage-Grouse Populations, 
Condor 108.4, 747-759. The authors of this study noted that the effects of stress are often subtle, 
but the resulting harm can be acute, chronic, and permanent, sometimes spanning generations. Id. 
 
Additionally, recent research suggests that lethal control may generate public opposition 
to wildlife managers, undermine positive attitudes toward wildlife and result in the devaluation 
of large carnivores such as wolves and coyotes. Bruskotter, J. T., J. J. Vaske, and R. H. Schmidt. 

Text Len: 1690
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and permanent, sometimes spanning generations. Id. 
 
Additionally, recent research suggests that lethal control may generate public opposition 
to wildlife managers, undermine positive attitudes toward wildlife and result in the devaluation 
of large carnivores such as wolves and coyotes. Bruskotter, J. T., J. J. Vaske, and R. H. Schmidt. 
2009, Social and Cognitive Correlates of Utah Residents' Acceptance of the Lethal Control of 
Wolves, Human Dimensions of Wildlife 14:119-132; Treves A., L. Naughton-Treves, and V.  
Shelley, 2013, Longitudinal analysis of attitudes toward wolves, Conservation Biology 27: 315-
323; Treves, et al., 2015, Predators and the Public Trust, Biological Reviews 92: 248-270. 
Research has discovered that American public acceptance of lethal methods of predator control 
has declined over the past two decades, with people increasingly finding lethal methods 
inhumane. Slagle et al., 2017, Attitudes toward predator control in the United States: 1995 and 
2014, Journal of Mammalogy, 98, 7-16.  In fact, a study in Massachusetts found that voters 
overwhelmingly opposed coyote hunting practices once they became aware of them. Jackman, J. 
L., and J. G. Way, 2017, Once I found out: Awareness of and attitudes toward coyote hunting 
policies in Massachusetts, Human Dimensions of Wildlife, DOI: 
10.1080/10871209.2017.1397824. Thus, the American Society of Mammalogists recently 
published a series of papers presenting new evidence of the greater efficacy and social 
acceptability of nonlethal deterrents to livestock depredation by large carnivores, as well as the 
lack of justification for and possible harm to populations
Text Len: 1667
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 DOI: 
10.1080/10871209.2017.1397824. Thus, the American Society of Mammalogists recently 
published a series of papers presenting new evidence of the greater efficacy and social 
acceptability of nonlethal deterrents to livestock depredation by large carnivores, as well as the 
lack of justification for and possible harm to populations and ecosystems resulting from lethal 
control of these predators. Bergstrom, B.J., 2017, Carnivore conservation: shifting the paradigm 
from control to coexistence, Journal of Mammalogy 98: 1-6. This followed research by Treves et 
al. (2016) that recommended suspending lethal predator control methods, especially by publicly 
funded government programs, which do not currently have rigorous evidence for functional 
effectiveness in preventing predation, until gold-standard tests are completed. Treves, A., M. 
Krofel, and J. McManus, 2016, Predator control should not be a shot in the dark, Frontiers of 
Ecology and Environment 14(7): 380–388, doi:10.1002/fee.1312.  Reliance on the outdated 
Connelly and Longhurst study results in ignoring all of this more recent research and its 
conclusions. 
 
In sum, due to advances in coyote and carnivore research, the antiquated Connolly and 
Longhurst data is largely unreliable and lacks utility for making determinations regarding 
coyotes. Its use must be discontinued to achieve compliance with USDA Information Quality 
guidelines. 
 
II. THE CHALLENGED INFORMATION IS INFLUENTIAL AND MUST MEET 
HIGHER STANDARDS 
  
 In addition to not meeting the basic standards stated above, the Connolly and Longhurst 
study does not meet the higher
Text Len: 1631
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
coyotes. Its use must be discontinued to achieve compliance with USDA Information Quality 
guidelines. 
 
II. THE CHALLENGED INFORMATION IS INFLUENTIAL AND MUST MEET 
HIGHER STANDARDS 
  
 In addition to not meeting the basic standards stated above, the Connolly and Longhurst 
study does not meet the higher standards for influential information. Information is influential 
when it is has a broad impact, such as affecting a wide range of parties (i.e., an entire industry), 
 
11 
 
rather than solely one company, and when its impact is intense, meaning that it has a large 
impact on affected parties. USDA Guidelines, Background, USDA's Definition of Influential 
Scientific, Financial, or Statistical Information.10   
 
Under the USDA definition, the Connolly and Longhurst study is undoubtedly influential 
in agency decision making. It has affected a broad range of parties, from wildlife biologists and 
veterinarians to farmers and loggers, as well as wildlife enthusiasts and visitors to public lands.  
It has had an intense impact, illustrated by the fact that USDA Wildlife Services spent over $1.13 
billion in federal tax dollars on wildlife extermination efforts between 2004 and 2013.11 The 
disputed study has informed coyote lethal control efforts and carnivore hunting policy for 
decades, despite being outdated and not peer reviewed, by being eternally regurgitated to support 
killing of up to 70% of a coyote population.12 Furthermore, due to USDA’s consistent reliance 
upon this study, its dissemination by this agency has also resulted in the widespread use of this 
study to establish liberal and excessive coyote and coywolf hunting policies by DOI and state 
game agencies across the country. See e.g., Ronald A. Thompson
Text Len: 1754
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

killing of up to 70% of a coyote population.12 Furthermore, due to USDA’s consistent reliance 
upon this study, its dissemination by this agency has also resulted in the widespread use of this 
study to establish liberal and excessive coyote and coywolf hunting policies by DOI and state 
game agencies across the country. See e.g., Ronald A. Thompson, The Cost of Predator Damage 
Control Using Trapping as the Primary Control Technique, Proceedings of the 7th Vertebrate 
Pest Conference 146 (1976);  National Park Service, Cape Cod National Seashore Hunting 
Program, Final Environmental Impact Statement, Cape Cod National Seashore, MA, 72 Fed. 
Reg. 44,176 (Aug. 7, 2007); EA: Mammal Damage Management in the Commonwealth of 
Massachusetts (2015). This dissemination to other federal and state agencies is significant and 
influential since Wildlife Services maintains a very close working relationship with state 
agriculture and wildlife agencies.  See, USDA APHIS Wildlife Services Directive, 3.101 and 
3.102. 
 
 The USDA’s Office of Inspector General formally acknowledges on its website that 
“influential information is subject to an added level of scrutiny.”13  According to the Department 
of the Agriculture’s guidelines, influential scientific information related to human health, safety, 
and the environment must “use the best available science and supporting studies conducted in 
accordance with sound and objective scientific practices,” and “use data collected by accepted 
methods or best available methods.” USDA Guidelines, Scientific Research, Part II. As a 42 year 
old non-peer reviewed speculative modeling study, it is evident that the Connolly and Longhurst 
             
Text Len: 1705
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
accordance with sound and objective scientific practices,” and “use data collected by accepted 
methods or best available methods.” USDA Guidelines, Scientific Research, Part II. As a 42 year 
old non-peer reviewed speculative modeling study, it is evident that the Connolly and Longhurst 
                                                           
10 Available at https://www.ocio.usda.gov/policy-directives-records-forms/guidelines-quality-
information/background 
11 See http://www.humanesociety.org/assets/pdfs/wildlife/USDA-wildlife-services-kill-data-2004-2013.pdf  
12 See e.g., FN5 supra, USDA, 5 Year Environmental Monitoring Review for Predator Damage Management in 
Montana: FY 2002 through FY 2006 (2007), 3-4; See also, Final EA:  Predator Damage and Conflict Management 
in Idaho (2016); Final EA: Reducing Coyote Damage to Livestock and Other Resources in Louisiana  (2016); EA: 
Mammal Damage Management in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts (2015); EA: Reducing Mammal Damage in 
the State of North Carolina (2015); EA: Mammal Damage Management in the State of Rhode Island (2014); EA: 
Mammal Damage Management in Arkansas (2013); Decision and Finding of No Significant Impact: Reducing 
Mammal Damage through an Integrated Wildlife Damage Management Program in the State of New Jersey  (2004); 
Decision and Finding of No Significant Impact for Management of Coyote, Dog, and Red
Text Len: 1398
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Mammal Damage Management in the State of Rhode Island (2014); EA: 
Mammal Damage Management in Arkansas (2013); Decision and Finding of No Significant Impact: Reducing 
Mammal Damage through an Integrated Wildlife Damage Management Program in the State of New Jersey  (2004); 
Decision and Finding of No Significant Impact for Management of Coyote, Dog, and Red Fox on Livestock in the 
Commonwealth of Virginia (2002); Environmental Assessment and Decision/Finding of No Significant Impact for 
Predator Damage Management in the College Station Animal Damage Control District Texas  (1997). 
13 Office of Inspector General Information Quality Guidelines, Standards for Disseminated Information,  
http://www.usda.gov/oig/qltyguidelinesrev.htm. 
 
12 
 
study does not come close to meeting the USDA’s requirements for the use of the best available 
science nor does it reflect data collected through the best available methods. Over the past 42 
years, there have been significantly more detailed and academically rigorous studies dealing with 
coyote reproduction, population density, efficacy of lethal control, and effects of hybridization 
on canid populations.14 Therefore, USDA lacks any justifiable reason to continue reliance upon 
this study in its decision-making concerning lethal control of coyote populations. 
 
USDA’s Data Quality Act standards also require USDA to “[d]isseminate influential 
scientific information with a high degree of transparency about data and methods to facilitate its 
reproducibility by qualified third parties.” Id.  However, the challenged study is not readily 
available to the public and PEER was only able to obtain a copy of this study through an inter-
library loan with the University of Arkansas, seemingly the only place where this study could be 

Text Len: 1801
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 with a high degree of transparency about data and methods to facilitate its 
reproducibility by qualified third parties.” Id.  However, the challenged study is not readily 
available to the public and PEER was only able to obtain a copy of this study through an inter-
library loan with the University of Arkansas, seemingly the only place where this study could be 
found, as it was unavailable on any USDA website, common research databases, or the broader 
internet. 
 
Based on the allegations above, it is clear that the USDA has developed its coyote control 
and hunting policies relying upon outdated information from the challenged study that is not the 
“best available science.” Because it is influential information, the agency must review the paper 
with heightened scrutiny, which should result in not using it in future documents, and retracting 
it from previous ones. 
 
III. PETITIONERS ARE AFFECTED BY THE INFORMATION ERRORS 
 
 Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility (“PEER”) is a non-profit public 
interest organization incorporated in Washington, D.C. and headquartered in Silver Spring, 
Maryland, with field offices in California, Colorado, Florida, Massachusetts, and Tennessee. 
Among other public interest projects, PEER engages in advocacy, research, education, and 
litigation to promote public understanding and debate concerning key current environmental 
policy issues.  PEER focuses on the environment, including the regulation and remediation of 
toxic substances, public lands, natural resource and wildlife management, public funding of 
environmental and natural resource agencies, scientific integrity, and ethics in government.  
Furthermore, PEER members include wildlife biologists who study large mammalian carnivores 
and are directly impacted by the USDA’s reliance upon and dissemination of improper data to 
establish coyote
Text Len: 1882
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 remediation of 
toxic substances, public lands, natural resource and wildlife management, public funding of 
environmental and natural resource agencies, scientific integrity, and ethics in government.  
Furthermore, PEER members include wildlife biologists who study large mammalian carnivores 
and are directly impacted by the USDA’s reliance upon and dissemination of improper data to 
establish coyote eradication, control, and hunting policies. 
 
 Additionally, the policy undergirded by the challenged study touches on a number of 
PEER’s traditional concerns.  Natural resource management, management of public lands and 
public trust resources including wildlife, and environmental stewardship more generally are all 
implicated by predator management by the USDA.  PEER believes that the USDA has not 
utilized the best available science, as required by law, in developing an appropriate, science-
based strategy for managing and considering the ecological importance of carnivores, such as 
                                                           
14 See Appendix A. 
 
13 
 
coyotes. Nor has the agency considered the importance of undisturbed populations of carnivores 
on the ecosystem or the ecological stability of agricultural lands and their surrounding 
environments.  PEER values the presence of wild animals necessary for a healthy environment.  
While PEER supports management efforts backed by sound scientific principles, the USDA’s 
current reliance on unreliable information has led to the mismanagement of a group of wild 
carnivores that PEER has an interest in protecting. 
 
The Humane Society of the United States (“
Text Len: 1651
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ER values the presence of wild animals necessary for a healthy environment.  
While PEER supports management efforts backed by sound scientific principles, the USDA’s 
current reliance on unreliable information has led to the mismanagement of a group of wild 
carnivores that PEER has an interest in protecting. 
 
The Humane Society of the United States (“The HSUS”) is the nation’s largest animal 
protection organization, headquartered in Washington, D.C. Since its establishment in 1954, The 
HSUS has worked to combat animal abuse and exploitation and promote animal welfare through 
research, public outreach and education, advocacy and litigation. The HSUS strives to protect 
wildlife and improve wildlife management throughout the country, and has long advocated 
coexistence and nonlethal alternatives to predator control, which often relies on inhumane 
techniques such as leg-hold traps, snares, and poisons like sodium cyanide, sodium nitrate and 
Compound 1080. USDA’s continued reliance on and dissemination of the challenged 
information harms The HSUS and its members’ interest in native carnivore conservation and 
prevention of animal suffering by promoting lethal predator control in a manner that is not 
supported by the best available science. 
 
Predator Defense is a national nonprofit advocacy organization funded primarily by 
member donations. It promotes non-lethal predator control that helps people and preserves 
wildlife, as well as monitors and challenges state and federal wildlife management policies that 
adversely affect predator species. Predator Defense works with these agencies in their efforts to 
protect native predators and when necessary, pursues litigation that requires agencies to follow 
laws and regulations established to protect native predators. 
Project Coyote is a national non-profit organization based in Northern California whose 
mission is to promote compassionate conservation and coexistence between
Text Len: 1964
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 federal wildlife management policies that 
adversely affect predator species. Predator Defense works with these agencies in their efforts to 
protect native predators and when necessary, pursues litigation that requires agencies to follow 
laws and regulations established to protect native predators. 
Project Coyote is a national non-profit organization based in Northern California whose 
mission is to promote compassionate conservation and coexistence between people and wildlife 
through education, science and advocacy. Its representatives, advisory board members and 
supporters include scientists, educators, ranchers and citizen leaders who work together to 
change laws and policies to protect native carnivores from abuse and mismanagement, 
advocating coexistence instead of killing. Project Coyote seeks to change negative attitudes 
toward coyotes, wolves and other misunderstood predators by replacing ignorance and fear with 
understanding, respect and appreciation. 
The Center for Biological Diversity believes that the welfare of human beings is deeply 
linked to nature — to the existence in our world of a vast diversity of wild animals and 
plants. Because diversity has intrinsic value, and because its loss impoverishes society, CBD 
works to secure a future for all species, great and small, hovering on the brink of extinction. 
CBD does so through science, law and creative media, with a focus on protecting the lands, 
waters and climate that species need to survive. 
The Animal Legal Defense Fund’s mission is to protect the lives and advance the 
interests of animals through the legal system. ALDF accomplishes this mission by filing high-
 
14 
 
impact lawsuits to protect animals from harm, providing free legal assistance and training to 
prosecutors to assure that animal abusers are punished for their crimes, supporting tough animal 
protection legislation and fighting legislation harmful to animals, and providing resources and 
opportunities to law students and professionals to advance
Text Len: 2030
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. ALDF accomplishes this mission by filing high-
 
14 
 
impact lawsuits to protect animals from harm, providing free legal assistance and training to 
prosecutors to assure that animal abusers are punished for their crimes, supporting tough animal 
protection legislation and fighting legislation harmful to animals, and providing resources and 
opportunities to law students and professionals to advance the emerging field of animal law. 
Since its founding in 1951, Animal Welfare Institute has sought to alleviate the suffering 
inflicted on animals by people. A major AWI effort is the quest to end the torture inflicted on 
furbearing animals by steel jaw leghold traps and wire snares. 
The National Wolfwatcher Coalition is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit, all volunteer organization. 
It educates, advocates, and participates for the long term recovery and the preservation of wolves 
based on the best available science and the principles of democracy. NWC educates the public, 
advocates for science-based decision making at every level of government and participate in 
activities that promote citizens’ awareness and participation in the decision-making process 
about wolves. It is a moderate organization that seeks to (1) find common ground among all 
stakeholders and (2) encourage solutions to roadblocks that challenge wolf recovery. 
Western Watersheds Project is a nonprofit environmental conservation group with 
1,500 members founded in 1993 and has field offices in Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, Arizona, 
Utah, Nevada and California. WWP works to influence and improve public lands management 
throughout the West with a primary focus on the negative impacts of livestock grazing on 250 
million acres of western public lands, including harm to ecological, biological, cultural, historic, 
archeological, scenic resources, wilderness values, roadless areas, Wilderness Study Areas and 
Text Len: 1895
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Arizona, 
Utah, Nevada and California. WWP works to influence and improve public lands management 
throughout the West with a primary focus on the negative impacts of livestock grazing on 250 
million acres of western public lands, including harm to ecological, biological, cultural, historic, 
archeological, scenic resources, wilderness values, roadless areas, Wilderness Study Areas and 
designated Wilderness. 
Protect the Wolves is a Native American Religious 501(c)(3) nonprofit that uses Tribal 
Treaty Rights to speak for wildlife. It hosts a wolf sanctuary where wolves can reside in a safe 
place, fights for the end of lethal control efforts on public lands, and promotes responsible 
animal husbandry practices in order to avoid conflicts between ranchers and wolves. 
Coyote Watch Canada is a Federal Not-For-Profit community-based, wildlife 
organization which advocates positive human wildlife experiences. It collaborates with a broad 
range of stakeholders to develop and implement of non-lethal, sustainable human-wildlife 
conflict solutions. The organization provides educational programming, a first-response team, 
on-site investigation, assessment and mitigation directives, wildlife rescue and release assistance, 
private, municipal- and provincial-level consultation, digital mapping programs, training, 
educational resources, and municipal wildlife framework models. 
Public Lands Media is an independent, non-partisan, source of ecological and 
conservation information. Its staff research, write, and publish articles, essays, and editorials on a 
variety of natural resource/environmental topics. PLM also provides information and assistance 
and links to scientists, the public, conservation groups and others so they can make better 
informed decisions on complex ecological issues. The organization’s goal is to provide 
scientifically informed perspectives on current conservation/environmental issues.  

Text Len: 1941
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 essays, and editorials on a 
variety of natural resource/environmental topics. PLM also provides information and assistance 
and links to scientists, the public, conservation groups and others so they can make better 
informed decisions on complex ecological issues. The organization’s goal is to provide 
scientifically informed perspectives on current conservation/environmental issues.  
 
15 
 
WildLands Defense’s activists’ and supporters’ on-the-ground presence, extensive 
experience enforcing existing statutory and regulatory regimes, and the group’s unparalleled 
conviction provide managers and policy-makers a clear and competent picture of the conditions 
of our public lands and wildlife communities on the ground as they exist, as well as lend 
decision-makers the sense of informed urgency as to the need for policy changes into the future. 
In Defense of Animals is an international animal protection organization with over 
250,000 valued supporters and a 30-year history of protecting animals, people and the 
environment through education, campaigns and hands on rescue facilities. It educates and 
exposes animal abuse as a root cause, symptom, and early predictor of wider societal violence. 
Its staff advocate change in laws, human behavior, and enlightenment in the need to protect lives, 
advance rights, improve welfare, and steward environmental protection. IDA cares for and 
rehabilitates lost, orphaned, abandoned, and abused animals inside three main sanctuaries.  
Center for Ecosystem Restoration is a non-profit organization headquartered in Wickford, 
R.I. that develops and leads projects and partnerships among local citizens, businesses, non-
profit organizations and government agencies. Its goal is to help communities accomplish local 
environmental and economic priorities through ecological restoration. It provides resources to 
accomplish that work
Text Len: 1896
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
uaries.  
Center for Ecosystem Restoration is a non-profit organization headquartered in Wickford, 
R.I. that develops and leads projects and partnerships among local citizens, businesses, non-
profit organizations and government agencies. Its goal is to help communities accomplish local 
environmental and economic priorities through ecological restoration. It provides resources to 
accomplish that work through technical support, grant-writing and funding development, 
outreach and other means. 
Raincoast Conservation Foundation is a team of conservationists and scientists 
empowered by their research to protect the lands, waters and wildlife of coastal British 
Columbia.  They use rigorous, peer-reviewed science and community engagement to further our 
conservation objectives.  As a charitable, non-profit conservation science organization that 
operates a research lab, research field station and a research/sailing vessel, Raincoast is unique in 
Canada. 
Founded in 1969 in Canada and in the UK in 1981, the International Fund for Animal 
Welfare saves individual animals, animal populations and habitats all over the world. With 
projects in more than 40 countries, IFAW provides hands-on assistance to animals in need, 
whether it’s dogs and cats, wildlife and livestock, or rescuing animals in the wake of disasters. 
IFAW also advocates saving populations from cruelty and depletion, such as its campaign to end 
commercial whaling and seal hunts. 
Alongside the listed organizational petitioners, petitioners include a number of the 
foremost researchers and advocates in the field of wildlife, carnivore, and canid conservation 
and/or research. As such, the continued use of faulty research to justify Agency policy directly 
impacts their interests. 
 
IV. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CORRECTION OF THE INFORMATION 
CHALLENGED
Text Len: 1841
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, petitioners include a number of the 
foremost researchers and advocates in the field of wildlife, carnivore, and canid conservation 
and/or research. As such, the continued use of faulty research to justify Agency policy directly 
impacts their interests. 
 
IV. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CORRECTION OF THE INFORMATION 
CHALLENGED BY THIS COMPLAINT 
  
 Accordingly, PEER respectfully requests the USDA APHIS take the following steps to 
comply with the Data Quality Act:  
 
16 
 
 
1. Retract from current and future agency usage the USDA-funded study: Connolly, G.E., and 
W.M. Longhurst, 1975, The effects of control on coyote populations: A simulation model, 
University of California, Division of Agricultural Sciences Bulletin, Volume 1872, 37 pp. 
  
2. Issue a public statement explaining the reasons for this retraction.  
 
3. Send a letter to other relevant USDA offices, the Department of Interior, and all state game 
agencies requesting that they refrain from relying on this retracted study for any regulatory or 
public health purpose.15  
 
 Please let us know if you require any additional information in support of this complaint 
or if there is any aspect of it that requires clarification.  
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
  
Adam Carlesco, Staff Counsel 
Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility 
962 Wayne Ave, Suite 610 
Silver Spring, MD 20910  
Tel:  202.265.7337 
Fax:  202.265.4192 
Email: acarlesco@peer.org 
 
Jonathan G. Way, Ph.D. 
Founder of Eastern
Text Len: 1486
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Staff Counsel 
Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility 
962 Wayne Ave, Suite 610 
Silver Spring, MD 20910  
Tel:  202.265.7337 
Fax:  202.265.4192 
Email: acarlesco@peer.org 
 
Jonathan G. Way, Ph.D. 
Founder of Eastern Coyote/Coywolf Research 
Co-Author of Carnivore Conservation Act of Massachusetts 
                                                           
15 In addition to continuous use by USDA, federal agencies within DOI and state game agencies have consistently 
relied upon this study or USDA NEPA material citing this study to justify large-scale coyote extermination and 
control efforts in planning and management documents. As these DOI documents utilizing this study would be 
subject to challenge during their respective comment periods, the USDA should avoid the vulnerability of numerous 
EAs by withdrawing the study from further use. Despite the plethora of data and studies that have emerged in recent 
years, federal and state game agencies continue to use a 40 year old, non -peer reviewed study for new environmental 
assessments to justify large-scale extermination and loosely regulated hunting of coyote populations. See e.g., 
National Park Service, Cape Cod National Seashore Hunting Program, Final Environmental Impact Statement, 
Cape Cod National Seashore, MA, 72 Fed. Reg. 44,176 (Aug. 7, 2007); Bureau of Land Management, Predator 
Hunt Derby #DOI-BLM-ID-I000-2014-0002-EA, Nov. 2014, https://eplan
Text Len: 1447
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Park Service, Cape Cod National Seashore Hunting Program, Final Environmental Impact Statement, 
Cape Cod National Seashore, MA, 72 Fed. Reg. 44,176 (Aug. 7, 2007); Bureau of Land Management, Predator 
Hunt Derby #DOI-BLM-ID-I000-2014-0002-EA, Nov. 2014, https://eplanning.blm.gov/epl-front-
office/projects/nepa/39720/51280/55821/SRP_Derby_EA_Final_508.pdf ; Nevada Animal Damage Control 
Program 2005 Work Plan for Nevada Public Lands (2005).  

 
17 
 
Osterville, MA 
 
Louise Kane, J.D. 
Justice for Wolves and Co-Author of Carnivore Conservation Act of Massachusetts 
Eastham, MA 
 
 
Co-Signatories: 
Scientists and Advocates 
Jane Goodall, Ph.D., DBE 
Founder, the Jane Goodall Institute 
United Nations Messenger of Peace 
Carter Niemeyer 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Biologist, Wildlife Services (retired) 
Boise, Idaho 
Adrian Treves, Ph.D. 
Professor, Nelson Institute for Environmental Studies 
University of Wisconsin–Madison 
Robert Wielgus, Ph.D. 
Professor, Director of the Large Carnivore Conservation Lab 
Washington State University 
Marc Bekoff, Ph.D. 
Professor Emeritus of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology 
University of Colorado, Boulder 
Bradley J. Bergstrom, Ph.D. 
Professor of Biology 
Valdosta State University 
Alexandra Horowitz, Ph.D. 
Adjunct Associate Professor,
Text Len: 1300
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ore Conservation Lab 
Washington State University 
Marc Bekoff, Ph.D. 
Professor Emeritus of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology 
University of Colorado, Boulder 
Bradley J. Bergstrom, Ph.D. 
Professor of Biology 
Valdosta State University 
Alexandra Horowitz, Ph.D. 
Adjunct Associate Professor, Canid Cognition 
Barnard College 
Paul Paquet, Ph.D 
Large Carnivore Biologist  
Canada  
Garrick Dutcher 
Research and Program Director 
Living with Wolves 
Doug Peacock  
President, Save the Yellowstone Grizzly  
Board Chair, Round River Conservation Studies 
Emigrant, Montana 
 
18 
 
Robin Bruckner  
NOAA Habitat Biologist (retired) 
Silver Spring, Maryland  
John Maguranis 
Project Coyote, Massachusetts Representative 
Belmont Animal Control Officer 
Founding Board Member for Missing Dogs Massachusetts 
Waltham, Massachusetts 
David Parsons 
Carnivore Conservation Biologist 
The Rewilding Institute 
Albuquerque, NM 
Laela Sayigh 
Biologist, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution 
Woods Hole, Massachusetts 
Virginia Fuller 
Former President, New England Wildlife Center 
Belmont, Massachusetts 
Mike Ruzich 
Science teacher, B.S. Biology  
Contributed to and modeled International Wolf Center’s “Of Wolves and Gray Matter” curriculum.  
Ely, Minnesota (in Superior National Forest on the edge of the Boundary Waters Canoe Area, in the 
middle of wolf Country) 
 
Organizations 
The Humane Society of the United States 
1255 23rd Street, NW
Text Len: 1445
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Contributed to and modeled International Wolf Center’s “Of Wolves and Gray Matter” curriculum.  
Ely, Minnesota (in Superior National Forest on the edge of the Boundary Waters Canoe Area, in the 
middle of wolf Country) 
 
Organizations 
The Humane Society of the United States 
1255 23rd Street, NW, Suite 450  
Washington, DC 20037 
Predator Defense  
Brooks Fahy, Executive Director  
P.O. Box 5446 
Eugene, Oregon 97405 
brooks@predatordefense.org  
Project Coyote 
Camilla H. Fox, Founder & Executive Director 
P.O. Box 5007  
Larkspur, California 94977  
Center for Biological Diversity 
P.O. Box 710 
Tucson, Arizona 85702-0710 
 
19 
 
Animal Legal Defense Fund 
Stephen Wells, Executive Director 
525 E Cotati Ave  
Cotati, California 94931 
Animal Welfare Institute 
Nancy Blaney, Director of Government Affairs 
900 Pennsylvania Ave., SE 
Washington, DC 20003 
International Fund for Animal Welfare 
Carson Barylak, Campaigns Officer 
1400 16th Street, NW, Suite 510 
Washington, DC 20036 
National Wolfwatcher Coalition 
Nancy Warren, Executive Director  
Duluth, Minnesota 
Western Watersheds Project 
Eric Molvar, Executive Director 
126 S. Main St, Ste B2 
P.O. Box 1770 
Hailey, Idaho 83333 
Protect The Wolves™ 
Patricia Herman, President 
Roger Dobson, Director 
18175 Hayes Way
Text Len: 1297
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, Executive Director  
Duluth, Minnesota 
Western Watersheds Project 
Eric Molvar, Executive Director 
126 S. Main St, Ste B2 
P.O. Box 1770 
Hailey, Idaho 83333 
Protect The Wolves™ 
Patricia Herman, President 
Roger Dobson, Director 
18175 Hayes Way 
Cottonwood, California  96022 
Coyote Watch Canada - Community Outreach Team 
Lesley Sampson, Founding Executive Director 
266 Four Mile Creek Rd  
Niagara-on-the-Lake, ON L0S 1J0 
Public Lands Media  
George Wuerthner 
Bend, Oregon  
WildLands Defense 
Natalie Ertz, Executive Director 
Hailey, Idaho 
In Defense of Animals 
President Marilyn Kroplick, MD 
Lisa Levinson, Sustainable Activism Campaign Director 
San Rafael, California 
 
20 
 
Center for Ecosystem Restoration 
Thomas Ardito, Director 
Saunderstown, Rhode Island 
Northeast Oregon Ecosystems 
Wally Sykes, Director  
Joseph, Oregon 
captmayo@eoni.com 
Raincoast Conservation Foundation 
Chris Genovali, Executive Director 
PO Box 2429 
Sidney, British Columbia V8L 3Y3 
Email: chris@raincoast.org  
 
21 
 
Appendix A 
Relevant Recent Coyote Population Research and Related Literature 
 
Berger, K.M. 2006. Carnivore-livestock conflicts: effects of subsidized predator control and 
economic correlates on the sheep industry. Conservation Biology 20(3):751-761. 
Bromley
Text Len: 1290
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.org  
 
21 
 
Appendix A 
Relevant Recent Coyote Population Research and Related Literature 
 
Berger, K.M. 2006. Carnivore-livestock conflicts: effects of subsidized predator control and 
economic correlates on the sheep industry. Conservation Biology 20(3):751-761. 
Bromley, C., and E. M. Gese. 2001. Effects of sterilization on territory fidelity and maintenance, 
pair bonds, and survival rates of free-ranging coyotes. Canadian Journal of Zoology 
79:386-392. 
Brainerd, S.M., H. Andren, E.E. Bangs, E.H. Bradley, J.A. Fontaine, et al. 2008. The effects of 
breeder loss on wolves. Journal of Wildlife Management 72: 89–98. 
Conner, M. M., M. M. Jaeger, T. J. Weller, and D. R. McCullough. 1998. Effect of coyote 
removal on sheep depredation in northern California. Journal of Wildlife Management 
62:690-699. 
Crabtree, R. 2012. Scientific Opinion Letter: "What effect does reduction of coyotes (older than 6 
months) have on the remaining population?" 5 pages. URL: 
http://www.projectcoyote.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/05/Crabtree_coyote_letter_PC_April_2013.pdf. 
Crabtree, R.L., and J.D. Varley. 1995. The ecological and sociodemographic role of the coyote 
on Yellowstone’s Northern Range. Pp. 63-84, In Proceedings of the 3rd biennial science 
conference on the Greater
Text Len: 1285
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
tree_coyote_letter_PC_April_2013.pdf. 
Crabtree, R.L., and J.D. Varley. 1995. The ecological and sociodemographic role of the coyote 
on Yellowstone’s Northern Range. Pp. 63-84, In Proceedings of the 3rd biennial science 
conference on the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, Greater Yellowstone’s Predators. 
Yellowstone National Park and Northern Rockies Conservation Cooperative, Mammoth, 
WY. 
Crabtree, R.L., and J.W. Sheldon. 1999. The ecological role of coyotes on Yellowstone's 
Northern Range. Yellowstone Science 7:15-24. 
Crooks, K.R., and M.E. Soule. 1999. Mesopredator release and avifaunal extinctions in a 
fragmented system. Nature 400:563-566. 
Estes, J.A., et al. 2011. Trophic downgrading of planet earth. Science 333: 301–306. 
Gehring, T. M., K. C. VerCauteren, and J.-M. Landry. 2010. Livestock Protection Dogs in the 
21st Century: Is an Ancient Tool Relevant to Modern Conservation Challenges? 
BioScience 60(4):299-308. 
Gehrt, S.D., S.P.D. Riley, and B.L. Cypher (Eds). 2010. Urban carnivores: ecology, conflict, and 
conservation. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD. 
Gese, E. M. 1998. Response of neighboring Coyotes (Canis latrans) to social disruption in an 
adjacent pack. Canadian Journal of Zoology 76: 1960-1963. 
Gese, E. M
Text Len: 1264
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 (Eds). 2010. Urban carnivores: ecology, conflict, and 
conservation. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD. 
Gese, E. M. 1998. Response of neighboring Coyotes (Canis latrans) to social disruption in an 
adjacent pack. Canadian Journal of Zoology 76: 1960-1963. 
Gese, E. M., R. L. Ruff, R. L. Crabtree. 1996. Foraging ecology of coyotes (Canis latrans): the 
influence of extrinsic factors and a dominance hierarchy. Canadian Journal of Zoology 
74:769-783. 
Gilbert, S.L., K.J. Sivy, C.B. Pozzanghera, A. DuBour, K. Overduijn, M.M. Smith, J. Zhou, J.M. 
Little, and L.R. Prugh 2016. Socioeconomic benefits of large carnivore recolonization 
through reduced wildlife-vehicle collisions. Conservation Letters 
DOI: 10.1111/conl.12280.  
Harrison, D. J. 1992a. Dispersal characteristics of juvenile coyotes in Maine. Journal of Wildlife 
Management 56: 128-138. 
Harrison, D.J. 1992b.  Social ecology of coyotes in northeastern North America: Relationships to 
dispersal, food resources, and human exploitation. Pages 53-72 in A. H. Boer, editor. 
 
22 
 
Ecology and management of the Eastern Coyote.  Wildlife Research Unit, University of 
New Brunswick, Fredericton, Canada. 
Henke, S.E., and F.C. Bryant. 1999. Effects of coyote removal on the faunal community in 
western
Text Len: 1283
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 in A. H. Boer, editor. 
 
22 
 
Ecology and management of the Eastern Coyote.  Wildlife Research Unit, University of 
New Brunswick, Fredericton, Canada. 
Henke, S.E., and F.C. Bryant. 1999. Effects of coyote removal on the faunal community in 
western Texas. Journal of Wildlife Management 63:1066-1081. 
Hornocker, M., and S. Negri, 2010. Cougar Ecology & Conservation. The University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago, USA. 
Knowlton, F. F., E. M. Gese, and M. M. Jaeger. 1999. Coyote depredation control: an interface 
between biology and management. Journal of Range Management 52: 398-412. 
Mech, L. D., and L. Boitani, editors. 2003. Wolves: behavior, ecology, and conservation. 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois, USA. 
Mezguida, E.T., S.J. Slater, and C.W. Benkman. 2006. Sage-grouse and indirect interactions: 
potential implications of coyote control on sage-grouse populations. The Condor 
108:747-759. 
Mitchell, B.R., M.M. Jaeger, and R.H. Barrett. 2004. Coyote depredation management: Current 
methods and research needs. Wildlife Society Bulletin 32: 1209-1218. 
Parker, G.R. 1995. Eastern Coyote: The Story of Its Success. Nimbus Publishing, Halifax, NS. 
Patterson, B.R., and F. Messier.  2001.  Social organization and space use of coyotes in eastern 
Canada relative to
Text Len: 1296
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
methods and research needs. Wildlife Society Bulletin 32: 1209-1218. 
Parker, G.R. 1995. Eastern Coyote: The Story of Its Success. Nimbus Publishing, Halifax, NS. 
Patterson, B.R., and F. Messier.  2001.  Social organization and space use of coyotes in eastern 
Canada relative to prey distribution and abundance. Journal of Mammalogy 82:463-477. 
Peebles, K.A., R.B. Wielgus, B.T. Maletzke, and M.E. Swanson. 2013. Effects of remedial sport 
hunting on cougar complaints and livestock depredations. PloS ONE. DOI: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0079713.  
Poessel, S.A., E.M. Gese, and J.K. Young. 2017. Environmental factors influencing the 
occurrence of coyotes and conflicts in urban areas. Landscape and Urban Planning 157: 
259–269. 
Povilitis, T. 2016. Compassionate Conservation for Yellowstone's Wolves. Nature Areas Journal 
36(3): 334-338. 
Proulx, G., and D. Rodtka. 2015. Predator Bounties in Western Canada Cause Animal Suffering 
and Compromise Wildlife Conservation Efforts. Animals 5:1034-1046. 
Ramp, D., and M. Bekoff. 2015.  Compassion as a Practical and Evolved Ethic for 
Conservation. BioScience 65: 323-327. 
Ripple, W.J., J.A. Estes, R.L. Beschta, C.C. Wilmers, E.G. Ritchie, M. Hebblewhite, J. Berger
Text Len: 1218
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. Bekoff. 2015.  Compassion as a Practical and Evolved Ethic for 
Conservation. BioScience 65: 323-327. 
Ripple, W.J., J.A. Estes, R.L. Beschta, C.C. Wilmers, E.G. Ritchie, M. Hebblewhite, J. Berger, 
B. Elmhagen, M. Letnic, M.P. Nelson, O.J. Schmitz, D.W. Smith, A.D. Wallach, and A.J. 
Wirsing. 2014. Status and ecological effects of the world’s largest carnivores. Science 
343: 151–162. 
Sacks, B. N., K. M. Blejwas, and M. M. Jaeger. 1999a. Relative vulnerability of coyotes to 
removal methods on a northern California ranch. Journal of Wildlife Management 
63:939-949. 
Sacks, B. N., M. M. Jaeger, J. C. C. Neale, and D. R. McCullough. 1999b. Territoriality and 
breeding status of coyotes relative to sheep predation. Journal of Wildlife Management 
63:593-605. 
Sargeant, G. A., and R. L. Ruff. 2001. Demographic response of Black Bears at Cold Lake, 
Alberta, to the removal of adult males. Ursus 12: 59-68. 
Stolzenberg, W. 2008. Where the wild things were: life, death, and ecological wreckage in a 
land of vanishing predators. Bloomsbury USA, New York. 291 pages. 
Treves, A., G. Chapron, J.V. Lopez-Bao, C. Shoemaker,
Text Len: 1132
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. Ursus 12: 59-68. 
Stolzenberg, W. 2008. Where the wild things were: life, death, and ecological wreckage in a 
land of vanishing predators. Bloomsbury USA, New York. 291 pages. 
Treves, A., G. Chapron, J.V. Lopez-Bao, C. Shoemaker, A.R. Goeckner, and J.T. Bruskotter. 
2015. Predators and the Public Trust. Biological Reviews 92: 248-270. 
 
23 
 
Treves, A., M. Krofel, and J. McManus. 2016. Predator control should not be a shot in the dark. 
Frontiers of Ecology and Environment 14(7): 380–388, doi:10.1002/fee.1312 
Van Eeden, L. M., et al. 2017. Managing conflict between large carnivores and livestock, 
Conservation Biology, doi: 10.1111/cobi.12959 
Vucetich, J., and M.P. Nelson. 2014. Wolf hunting and the ethics of predator control. Political 
science, comparative politics, political theory. Oxford, UK: Oxford Handbooks Online. 
Wallach, A.D., M. Bekoff, M.P. Nelson, and D. Ramp 2015. Promoting predators and 
compassionate conservation. Conservation Biology 29: 1481-1484. 
Wallach, A. D., E. G. Ritchie, J. Read, and A.J. O’Neill. 2009. More than mere numbers: the 
impact of lethal control on the social stability of a top-order predator. PloS ONE 
4(9):e6861:1-8. 
Way, J.G.
Text Len: 1193
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
Wallach, A. D., E. G. Ritchie, J. Read, and A.J. O’Neill. 2009. More than mere numbers: the 
impact of lethal control on the social stability of a top-order predator. PloS ONE 
4(9):e6861:1-8. 
Way, J.G. 2007. Movements of transient coyotes (Canis latrans var.) in urbanized eastern 
Massachusetts. Canadian Field-Naturalist 121(4): 364-369. 
Way, J. G. 2010. Double-litters in Coywolf (Canis latrans x lycaon) Packs Following the Death 
or Disappearance of a Resident Territorial Male. Canadian Field Naturalist 124(3): 256-
257. 
Way, J.G. 2011. Eastern Coyote/Coywolf (Canis latrans x lycaon) Movement Patterns: Lessons 
Learned in Urbanized Ecosystems. Cities and the Environment (CATE) 4(1): article 2, 12 
pages. http://digitalcommons.lmu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1044&context=cate. 
Way, J.G., and B.N. White. 2013. Coyotes, red foxes, and the prevalence of Lyme disease. 
Northeastern Naturalist 20(4):655-665.  
Way, J. G., I.M. Ortega, and P.J. Auger. 2002. Eastern coyote home range, territoriality and 
sociality on urbanized Cape Cod, Massachusetts. Northeast Wildlife 57: 1-18. 
Way, J. G., B.C. Timm, and E. G. Strauss. 2009. Coywolf (Canis latrans x lycaon)
Text Len: 1182
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. Ortega, and P.J. Auger. 2002. Eastern coyote home range, territoriality and 
sociality on urbanized Cape Cod, Massachusetts. Northeast Wildlife 57: 1-18. 
Way, J. G., B.C. Timm, and E. G. Strauss. 2009. Coywolf (Canis latrans x lycaon) pack density 
doubles following the death of a resident territorial male. Canadian Field Naturalist 
123(3): 199-205. 
Wielgus, R.B., and K.A. Peebles. 2014. Effects of Wolf Mortality on Livestock Depredations. 
PLoS ONE 9(12): e113505. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0113505. 
 
Text Len: 511
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
1 
 
 
December 20, 2017 
VIA EMAIL AND U.S. MAIL 
 
Connie Williams, Chief, Program Evaluation and Decision Support 
Quality of Information Officer 
USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
4700 River Road, Unit 120 
Riverdale, MD 20737 
Connie.M.Williams@aphis.usda.gov 
(301) 851-3087 
 
RE: COMPLAINT ABOUT INFORMATION QUALITY 
 
Dear Ms. Williams, 
 
 PEER respectfully submits this complaint about Data Quality. 
 
 Pursuant to Section (b)(2)(B) of the Data Quality Act of 2000 (“DQA”), Section 515 of 
Public Law 106-554, and the Correction of Information mechanism of the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture Information Quality Guidelines, Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility 
(“PEER”) hereby challenges data manipulation and conclusions drawn therefrom by the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture (“USDA”), as detailed infra. PEER is especially concerned about the 
government’s dissemination of faulty research that has been erroneously used to justify harmful, 
commonplace, and excessive coyote control and extermination policies throughout federal lands 
despite more recent, thorough, and peer-reviewed scientific studies demonstrating the importance 
of large mammalian carnivores contributing to ecological health and stability. Specifically, 
PEER challenges the government’s continued reliance upon the USDA-funded study Connolly, 
G.E., and W.M. Longhurst, 1975, The effects of control on coyote populations: A simulation 
model, University of California, Division of Agricultural Sciences Bulletin, Volume 1872, 37 pp. 
Text Len: 1554
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ores contributing to ecological health and stability. Specifically, 
PEER challenges the government’s continued reliance upon the USDA-funded study Connolly, 
G.E., and W.M. Longhurst, 1975, The effects of control on coyote populations: A simulation 
model, University of California, Division of Agricultural Sciences Bulletin, Volume 1872, 37 pp. 
(hereinafter “Connolly and Longhurst study”). 
 
The USDA has consistently used this study for over 40 years, despite its established 
flaws and disputed findings, to justify large-scale coyote extermination efforts – even though the 
study’s own findings stated that eradication efforts were not an effective means of preventing 
depredation. In addition to being used to justify large-scale coyote control (i.e., killing 

 
2 
 
programs), this obscure (i.e., a small agricultural bulletin) and non-peer reviewed study has been 
cited and utilized in a variety of USDA documents over the years to justify a variety of agency 
actions related to coyote management. See, e.g., Paul L. Hegdal et al., Hazards to Wildlife 
Associated with 1080 Baiting for California Ground Squirrels, USDA National Wildlife 
Research Center – Staff Publications (1979);  Guy E. Connolly, The Effects of Control on Coyote 
Populations: Another Look, Symposium Proceedings—Coyotes in the Southwest: A 
Compendium of Our Knowledge 23 (1995); Kathleen A. Fagerstone and Gail Keirn, Wildlife 
Services—A Leader in Developing Tools and Techniques for Managing Carnivores, USDA 
National Wildlife Research Center – Staff Publications (2012); Eric Gese, Demographic and 
Spatial Responses of Coyotes to Changes in Food and Explo
Text Len: 1652
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
: A 
Compendium of Our Knowledge 23 (1995); Kathleen A. Fagerstone and Gail Keirn, Wildlife 
Services—A Leader in Developing Tools and Techniques for Managing Carnivores, USDA 
National Wildlife Research Center – Staff Publications (2012); Eric Gese, Demographic and 
Spatial Responses of Coyotes to Changes in Food and Exploitation, Wildlife Damage 
Management Conferences—Proceedings 131 (2005); John L. Gittleman et al., “References” for 
Carnivore Conservation, USDA National Wildlife Research Center – Staff Publications (2001);  
Gary Lee Nunley, Present and Historical Bobcat Population Trends in New Mexico and the 
West, Proceedings of the 8th Vertebrate Pest Conference 177, 180 (1978); Stewart W. Breck et 
al., Evaluating Lethal and Non-Lethal Management Options for Urban Coyotes (2016); William 
C. Pitt et al., An Individual-Based Model of Canid Populations: Modelling Territoriality and 
Social Structure (2003); USDA, 5 Year Environmental Monitoring Review for Predator Damage 
Management in Montana: FY 2002 through FY 2006 (2007).  
 
Furthermore, USDA has relied upon this study for justification of coyote eradication 
efforts or large scale control (i.e., killing) programs in numerous Environmental Assessments 
and Findings of No Significant Impact under the National Environmental Policy Act, 42 U.S.C. § 
4321, et seq (“NEPA”). This includes, but is not by any means limited to, Final EA:  Predator 
Damage and Conflict Management in Idaho (2016); Final EA: Reducing Coyote Damage to 
Livestock and Other Resources in Louisiana (2016); EA: Mammal Damage Management in the 
Commonwealth
Text Len: 1611
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. § 
4321, et seq (“NEPA”). This includes, but is not by any means limited to, Final EA:  Predator 
Damage and Conflict Management in Idaho (2016); Final EA: Reducing Coyote Damage to 
Livestock and Other Resources in Louisiana (2016); EA: Mammal Damage Management in the 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts (2015); EA: Reducing Mammal Damage in the State of North 
Carolina (2015); EA: Mammal Damage Management in the State of Rhode Island (2014); EA: 
Mammal Damage Management in Arkansas (2013); Decision and Finding of No Significant 
Impact: Reducing Mammal Damage through an Integrated Wildlife Damage Management 
Program in the State of New Jersey (2004); Decision and Finding of No Significant Impact for 
Management of Coyote, Dog, and Red Fox on Livestock in the Commonwealth of Virginia 
(2002); Environmental Assessment and Decision/Finding of No Significant Impact for Predator 
Damage Management in the College Station Animal Damage Control District Texas (1997).  
While USDA guidelines limit challenge of material used in NEPA documents to the public 
comment period for each NEPA document, it is evident from the recent and continued use of this 
study in justifying coyote eradication and control efforts that the study is being disseminated by 
the USDA and is clearly influential in both state and federal wildlife agency decision and policy-
making, despite its faulty nature.  
 
USDA’s use of the Connolly study violates the requirements of the Data Quality Act and 
as such the study should be removed from use by the agency and notice of its discontinued use 
be distributed among the USDA, Department of Interior (“DOI”) and state game agencies still 
utilizing this study to justify coyote hunting policies and control strategies.
Text Len: 1752
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
USDA’s use of the Connolly study violates the requirements of the Data Quality Act and 
as such the study should be removed from use by the agency and notice of its discontinued use 
be distributed among the USDA, Department of Interior (“DOI”) and state game agencies still 
utilizing this study to justify coyote hunting policies and control strategies. 
 
3 
 
 
 According to the Information Quality Guidelines, affected persons may avail themselves 
of multiple methods for notifying the USDA of complaints.  See USDA, Office of the Chief 
Information Officer, Information Quality Guidelines: Correction of Information, available at 
https://www.ocio.usda.gov/policy-directives-records-forms/guidelines-quality-
information/correction-information.  In accordance with those guidelines, PEER has mailed and 
emailed this complaint to the stated addresses and directed the complaint to Connie Williams, 
Chief Information Officer for the USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service. See id.  
APHIS includes Wildlife Services, the primary USDA component disseminating the Connelly 
and Longhurst study. 
 
I. CHALLENGED INFORMATION DOES NOT COMPLY WITH THE INFORMATION 
QUALITY GUIDELINES 
 
 a. Legal Basis for Data Quality Act Challenge 
 
 Section 515 of the Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act of 2001 (PL 
106-544, H.R. 5658) directs the Office of Management and Budget (“OMB”) to issue 
government-wide guidelines that “provide policy and procedural guidance to Federal agencies 
for ensuring and maximizing the quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of information 
(including statistical information) disseminated by Federal agencies.” OMB published final 
guidelines
Text Len: 1703
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. 5658) directs the Office of Management and Budget (“OMB”) to issue 
government-wide guidelines that “provide policy and procedural guidance to Federal agencies 
for ensuring and maximizing the quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of information 
(including statistical information) disseminated by Federal agencies.” OMB published final 
guidelines to implement Section 515 in the Federal Register on September 28, 2001, 66 Fed. 
Reg. 49718, (Sep. 28, 2001), and subsequently updated these guidelines on February 22, 2002, 
67 Fed. Reg. 8452 (Feb. 22, 2002). 
 
 OMB’s guidelines direct that Federal agencies “shall develop a process for reviewing the 
quality (including the objectivity, utility, and integrity) of information before it is disseminated. 
Agencies shall treat information quality as integral to every step of an agency’s development of 
information, including creation, collection, maintenance, and dissemination.” 67 Fed. Reg. 8452, 
8459 (Feb. 22, 2002). Furthermore, “[t]o facilitate public review, agencies shall establish 
administrative mechanisms allowing affected persons to seek and obtain, where appropriate, 
timely correction of information maintained and disseminated by the agency that does not 
comply with OMB or agency guidelines. These administrative mechanisms shall be flexible, 
appropriate to the nature and timeliness of the disseminated information, and incorporated into 
agency information resources management and administrative practices.” Id. 
  
 The purpose of the Data Quality Act was to ensure that the government disseminated the 
best quality information. See 66 Fed. Reg. 49718, 49718 (Sep. 28, 2001). OMB guidelines 
require a basic standard of quality. 67 Fed. Reg
Text Len: 1729
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 information, and incorporated into 
agency information resources management and administrative practices.” Id. 
  
 The purpose of the Data Quality Act was to ensure that the government disseminated the 
best quality information. See 66 Fed. Reg. 49718, 49718 (Sep. 28, 2001). OMB guidelines 
require a basic standard of quality. 67 Fed. Reg. 8452, 8458 (Feb. 22, 2002). They also require 
that each agency adopt guidelines appropriate for the information they disseminate. Id.  In this 
case, the Department of the Agriculture’s guidelines govern the challenge.  USDA, Office of the 
 
4 
 
Chief Information Officer, Information Quality Activities.1 The Department stated therein that it 
will make sure that information disseminated is accurate, reliable, and unbiased, and will “treat 
information quality as integral to every step in their development of information, including 
creation, collection, maintenance, and dissemination.”  USDA Guidelines, Information Quality 
Activities, IQA Main.    
 
The data disseminated by the USDA must meet requirements of objectivity, utility, and 
integrity. Id.  To fulfill agency objectivity requirements, agency information must be 
“substantively accurate, reliable, and unbiased” and the agency must identify such information 
for public review of its objectivity.  Id. The USDA assesses the utility of a study based upon its 
internal review of usefulness of the information and requires that disseminated information is 
accessible to all persons. Id. 
 
 Among the other s tandards, the USDA guidelines state that as a general matter, 
scientific and research information that has been subjected to formal, independent, external 
peer review is regarded as presumptively objective.  USDA Guidelines, Information
Text Len: 1765
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
internal review of usefulness of the information and requires that disseminated information is 
accessible to all persons. Id. 
 
 Among the other s tandards, the USDA guidelines state that as a general matter, 
scientific and research information that has been subjected to formal, independent, external 
peer review is regarded as presumptively objective.  USDA Guidelines, Information 
Quality Activities, Scientific Research.  For the peer review process, the USDA guidelines 
require that one or more of the following procedures be used for influential studies:2  
  
1. Conduct a peer review that meets the standards recommended by the OMB 
Bulletin. 
 
i. Where appropriate, subject the information to formal, independent, 
external peer review to ensure its objectivity. If data and analytic 
results have been subjected to such a review, the information may 
generally be presumed to be of acceptable objectivity.  However, in 
accordance with the OMB standard, this presumption is rebuttable 
based on a persuasive showing by a petitioner in a particular instance, 
although the burden of proof is on the complainant.  
 
ii. If agen cy-sponsored peer review is employed to help satisfy the 
objectivity standard, the review process should meet the general 
criteria for competent and credible peer review recommended by 
OMB.  OMB recommends that (a) peer reviewers be selected 
primarily on t he basis of necessary technical expertise, (b) peer 
reviewers be expected to disclose to agencies prior technical/policy 
positions they may have taken on issues at hand, (c) peer reviewers be 
expected to disclose to agencies their sources of personal and 
                       
Text Len: 1689
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 basis of necessary technical expertise, (b) peer 
reviewers be expected to disclose to agencies prior technical/policy 
positions they may have taken on issues at hand, (c) peer reviewers be 
expected to disclose to agencies their sources of personal and 
                                                           
1 Available at https://www.ocio.usda.gov/policy-directives-records-forms/information-quality-activities   
2 The challenged Connolly and Longhurst study meets the influential standard as it has been the definitive study 
used by USDA for the past 40 years to establish lethal control policies and has been used by the U.S. Department of 
Interior and state game agencies. 
 
5 
 
institutional funding (private or public sector), and (d) peer reviews 
be conducted in an open and rigorous manner. 
 
2. Confirm that the information to be released has been peer reviewed by a 
reputable scientific or professional journal, and the journal has agreed to publish 
the same information.  
 
3. Conduct an internal review, which for the purposes of establishing 
transparency, ensures that the report or research product clearly states what the 
information and data are, how they were obtained, and any reservati ons or 
limitations on their use.  
   
USDA Peer Review Implementation Guidelines at 5-6.3 The presumption that peer-reviewed 
material is objective can be rebutted, and non-peer reviewed studies are not considered to be 
presumptively objective
Text Len: 1472
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

information and data are, how they were obtained, and any reservati ons or 
limitations on their use.  
   
USDA Peer Review Implementation Guidelines at 5-6.3 The presumption that peer-reviewed 
material is objective can be rebutted, and non-peer reviewed studies are not considered to be 
presumptively objective.  Id; see also 67 Fed. Reg. 8452, 8459 (Feb. 22, 2002).   
 
 The Information Quality Guidelines describe how a challenge to the quality of 
information must proceed.  USDA Guidelines, Correction of Information.  The challenge must 
have six elements: a statement that the submittal is under USDA’s Information Quality 
Guidelines, a specific reference to the information being challenged, a statement from the 
complainant describing why the information does not satisfy the Department’s or OMB’s 
guidelines, the ways in which the complainant is affected by the information, a recommendation 
and justification for how the information should be corrected, and the name, address and other 
contact information of the complainant.  Id.  All these requirements are satisfied in this letter.   
 
 PEER’s name, address, phone number, fax number and email address is provided, the 
specific study is cited above, and the complainant is affected in ways described in Part III of this 
letter.  Additionally, the challenged information violates the standards of data quality because it 
lacks the baseline reliability quality required by statute.  “Quality” as a term encompasses utility, 
objectivity, and integrity.  67 Fed. Reg. 8452, 8459 (Feb. 22, 2002).  As it relates to quality, 
utility refers to “the usefulness of the information to its intended users
Text Len: 1673
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 standards of data quality because it 
lacks the baseline reliability quality required by statute.  “Quality” as a term encompasses utility, 
objectivity, and integrity.  67 Fed. Reg. 8452, 8459 (Feb. 22, 2002).  As it relates to quality, 
utility refers to “the usefulness of the information to its intended users, including the public. In 
assessing the usefulness of information that the agency disseminates to the public, the agency 
needs to consider the uses of the information not only from the perspective of the agency but also 
from the perspective of the public.”  Id. (emphasis added). Furthermore, “when transparency of 
information is relevant to assessing the information’s usefulness from the public’s perspective, 
the agency must take care to ensure that transparency has been addressed in its review of the 
information.” Id. In this case, the information challenged herein is of limited utility due to its 
age, lack of transparency, and the numerous recent peer-reviewed publications rebutting its 
erroneous conclusions.  It can no longer reasonably be used to inform the government’s 
carnivore control policy.  Furthermore, even if a challenged study has been through the peer 
review process (which this study and its 1995 review by its principal researcher do not appear to 
                                                           
3 USDA, Office of the Chief Information Officer, USDA’s Peer Review Guidelines, available at 
https://www.ocio.usda.gov/document/usdas-peer
Text Len: 1500
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                      
3 USDA, Office of the Chief Information Officer, USDA’s Peer Review Guidelines, available at 
https://www.ocio.usda.gov/document/usdas-peer-review-guidelines.  
 
6 
 
have been), its presumption of objectivity may be rebutted with a showing by a petitioner.  67 
Fed. Reg. 8452, 8459 (Feb. 22, 2002).  The information provided by this study is not reliable or 
accurate; thus even if it were peer-reviewed, the presumption in its favor would be rebutted.   
 
 
 b. Issues with the Quality of the USDA Research 
 
The Connolly and Longhurst study lacks utility for USDA’s intended purpose of evaluating and 
authorizing large-scale coyote extermination. 
 
 By repeatedly using the Connolly and Longhurst study for more than 40 years, USDA 
continues to rely on its findings as scientific evidence justifying large-scale coyote extermination 
programs, killing 76,859 coyotes in 2016 alone.4 The study has been relied on to support a claim 
of population resiliency in explosives and poison usage assessments, population modeling 
publications, NEPA documents for lethal control programs, and efficacy reviews for various 
carnivore management tactics, as well as a variety of other agency documents. In other words, 
USDA has justified exterminating coyotes on the basis of the study’s questionable conclusion 
that coyote populations rebound after major extermination events – while ignoring the ultimate 
conclusion of the study that lethal management of coyotes is not
Text Len: 1512
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and efficacy reviews for various 
carnivore management tactics, as well as a variety of other agency documents. In other words, 
USDA has justified exterminating coyotes on the basis of the study’s questionable conclusion 
that coyote populations rebound after major extermination events – while ignoring the ultimate 
conclusion of the study that lethal management of coyotes is not an effective method for 
reducing coyote populations or depredation events. Not only has USDA employed this study for 
internal purposes, it has disseminated this study to state game agencies and the DOI for use in 
their hunting program environmental assessments and planning materials.  
 
However, it is abundantly clear that this study is no longer useful, due to its age and 
countless errors (discussed in detail below). Even apart from these flaws, USDA misuses the 
study to justify a practice that the study actually recommends against. The study that USDA uses 
to justify broad lethal control of coyotes actually describes the futility of killing coyotes for 
management purposes since the species will simply rebound in numbers in a short period of time 
(<3 years) due to density dependent responsive reproduction. In fact, the authors finished their 
paper by concluding that they “emphatically do not recommend eradication as the preferred 
coyote management strategy . . . Killing coyotes unselectively . . . is not a very feasible means of 
reducing populations over broad geographical areas.” Connolly and Longhurst at 32-33 
(emphasis added). Rather than providing justifications for coyote killing, the authors 
“suggest[ed] that other means should be found to reduce coyote depredations, and that better 
understanding of coyote population dynamics is required.” Connolly and Longhurst at 33. We 
now understand more about
Text Len: 1828
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
olly and Longhurst at 32-33 
(emphasis added). Rather than providing justifications for coyote killing, the authors 
“suggest[ed] that other means should be found to reduce coyote depredations, and that better 
understanding of coyote population dynamics is required.” Connolly and Longhurst at 33. We 
now understand more about coyote population dynamics. 
 
Moreover, this study, which is relied upon so heavily by not just the USDA but also the 
DOI and numerous state game agencies,5 is based on speculative – not empirical – data from the 
                                                           
4 See https://www.aphis.usda.gov/wildlife_damage/pdr/PDR-G_Report.php?fld=&fld_val= 
5 As state game agencies often rely upon federal data and research to establish lethal control guidelines and hunting 
regulations, USDA and DOI reliance upon this study has significantly impacted state management of wildlife. See, 
e.g., Strawberry Valley Greater Sage-Grouse (Centrocercus Urophasianus) Local Conservation Plan (2006); 
 
7 
 
1970s. In fact, when discussing birth and death functions, the authors feel compelled to 
“reemphasize that the form of these functions is largely speculative.” Connolly and Longhurst at 
15 (emphasis added). This paper is over 40 years old and reams of scientific data on coyotes and 
predators in general have been produced since then.6  
 

Text Len: 1378
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 when discussing birth and death functions, the authors feel compelled to 
“reemphasize that the form of these functions is largely speculative.” Connolly and Longhurst at 
15 (emphasis added). This paper is over 40 years old and reams of scientific data on coyotes and 
predators in general have been produced since then.6  
 
 It is questionable at best, and dishonest at worst, for USDA and other agencies to 
continue to rely on this 42 year old model, based on “largely speculative” data. Even the authors 
seem to acknowledge the unsuitability of using their work to justify lethal control by saying, 
“[s]ince reliable estimates of coyote numbers are notoriously difficult to obtain, the information 
needed to plan intelligent predator management programs is not usually available. In most areas 
we simply do not know how the control kill relates to the size of the population, or even whether 
coyote numbers are increasing or decreasing.” Connolly and Longhurst at 27. Not only does 
recent research demonstrate that lethal control programs have detrimental ecological effects, but 
it reinforces the missed message of the Connolly and Longhurst study that lethal control of 
carnivores is not an effective tactic for combating livestock depredation. See Treves, A., M. 
Krofel and J. McManus (2016), Predator control should not be a shot in the dark, Frontiers in 
Ecology and the Environment 14: 380–388; Van Eeden, L. M., et al. (2017), Managing conflict 
between large carnivores and livestock, Conservation Biology, doi: 10.1111/cobi.12959.  
Considering the fact that a tremendous volume of coyote research and data has emerged since the 
1970s (including birth rates,
Text Len: 1685
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ecology and the Environment 14: 380–388; Van Eeden, L. M., et al. (2017), Managing conflict 
between large carnivores and livestock, Conservation Biology, doi: 10.1111/cobi.12959.  
Considering the fact that a tremendous volume of coyote research and data has emerged since the 
1970s (including birth rates, age ratios, survival, effects of hybridization, etc.), the Connolly and 
Longhurst study has been rendered useless and antiquated for purposes of scientifically sound 
coyote control and hunting decisions.  
 
Furthermore, the Connolly and Longhurst study is cited by USDA materials to 
erroneously reach broad conclusions about management of coyotes in the eastern U.S., such as 
the acceptability of large scale lethal management programs7 and the efficacy of lethal control8, 
despite this region possessing a different population of canids, namely the eastern coyote, or 
coywolf, a hybridized subspecies with only roughly 60% shared genetics with western Canis 
latrans. Neither PEER nor its coyote researcher collaborators have been able to locate any 
USDA, or more specifically Wildlife Services, documents that effectively address the 
reproductive and behavioral differences between the western Canis latrans and the eastern 
coyote, whose reproductive rates and behavior often resembles the wolf, Canis spp. (lycaon or 
lupus), with which it shares roughly 30% of its genetics. This manifests in the eastern coywolf 
possessing delayed sexual maturity, smaller litter size, larger territories, and differences in prey 
preference when compared to western Canis latrans. See Way, J.G. and Lynn, W.S., 
Northeastern coyote/coywolf taxonomy and admixture: A meta-analysis,
Text Len: 1689
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 of its genetics. This manifests in the eastern coywolf 
possessing delayed sexual maturity, smaller litter size, larger territories, and differences in prey 
preference when compared to western Canis latrans. See Way, J.G. and Lynn, W.S., 
Northeastern coyote/coywolf taxonomy and admixture: A meta-analysis, Canid Biology & 
Conservation 19(1): 1-7 (2016); http://canids.org/CBC/19/Northeastern_coyote_taxonomy.pdf. 
                                                           
Nevada Animal Damage Control Program 2005 Work Plan for Nevada Public Lands  (2005); Southeastern Arizona 
Wild Turkey Management Plan (2000). 
6 See Appendix. A. 
7 See e.g., Decision and Finding of No Significant Impact: Reducing Mammal Damage through an Integrated 
Wildlife Damage Management Program in the State of New Jersey (2004). 
8 See, e.g., Stewart W. Breck et al., Evaluating Lethal and Non-Lethal Management Options for Urban Coyotes 
(2016). 
 
8 
 
Therefore, the challenged study lacks utility in predator management decisions and studies for 
large parts of the U.S. where hybridized eastern coyote/coywolf populations have replaced Canis 
latrans populations; yet USDA usage and dissemination of this material does not reflect these 
differences. 
 
USDA’s use of the Connolly and Longhurst study lacks objectivity because the study is 
inaccurate and unreliable
Text Len: 1360
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
large parts of the U.S. where hybridized eastern coyote/coywolf populations have replaced Canis 
latrans populations; yet USDA usage and dissemination of this material does not reflect these 
differences. 
 
USDA’s use of the Connolly and Longhurst study lacks objectivity because the study is 
inaccurate and unreliable.   
 
 Despite being outdated and not peer reviewed, the Connolly and Longhurst study 
continues to be used to support decisions by federal and state agricultural departments and 
wildlife agencies promoting the unlimited slaughter of coyotes nationwide. Specifically, agency 
studies and decisions are justified by Connolly and Longhurst’s speculative finding that “coyotes 
through compensatory reproduction can withstand an annual control level of 70%.” Connolly 
and Longhurst at 19.9 Yet, while agencies continue to rely on this study, the substance remains 
inaccurate, unreliable, and biased. Inaccuracies throughout the study affect both models and 
conclusions. This is seen early on in the study when the author states that “in the model, both 
control and natural losses are calculated once each year[,]” However, earlier in the paper, it is 
mentioned that losses occur throughout the year, making reliance on data calculated once a year 
unsound. Connolly & Longhurst at 3. While it is just a model, having only one mortality event is 
highly inaccurate given that deaths occur throughout the year (Parker 1995), and such an 
inaccuracy could clearly affect population models. See G.R. Parker, Eastern Coyote: The Story 
of Its Success (1995), Nimbus Publishing, Halifax, NS. 
 
 Recent research and data on coyotes has revealed the information set forth in the 
Conn
Text Len: 1703
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

highly inaccurate given that deaths occur throughout the year (Parker 1995), and such an 
inaccuracy could clearly affect population models. See G.R. Parker, Eastern Coyote: The Story 
of Its Success (1995), Nimbus Publishing, Halifax, NS. 
 
 Recent research and data on coyotes has revealed the information set forth in the 
Connolly and Longhurst study to be even more inaccurate than it appeared at the time. Figure 3 
of the study, charting coyote litter size related to coyote density, is just one example of such an 
inaccuracy revealed by recent data. Connolly & Longhurst at 10. The corresponding text states 
that coyote litter size increases with additional control. While Knowlton (1972) noted that 
average litter size varied inversely with density of coyotes whereby lower populations of coyotes 
(i.e., ones that were subjected to human lethal control) had higher litter sizes (and cited in 
Connolly and Longhurst 1975), more recently, Crabtree and Sheldon (1999) suggested that litter 
survival and not litter size at birth is the major reproductive parameter that responds to human 
exploitation in a density-dependent manner because litter size varied little with prey abundance. 
                                                           
9 See USDA, 5 Year Environmental Monitoring Review for Predator Damage Management in Montana: FY 2002 
through FY 2006 (2007), 3-4; Paul L. Hegdal et al., Hazards to Wildlife Associated with 1080 Baiting for California 
Ground Squirrels, USDA National Wildlife Research Center – Staff Publications (1979)
Text Len: 1565
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
            
9 See USDA, 5 Year Environmental Monitoring Review for Predator Damage Management in Montana: FY 2002 
through FY 2006 (2007), 3-4; Paul L. Hegdal et al., Hazards to Wildlife Associated with 1080 Baiting for California 
Ground Squirrels, USDA National Wildlife Research Center – Staff Publications (1979) at 34. See also, Final EA:  
Predator Damage and Conflict Management in Idaho (2016); Final EA: Reducing Coyote Damage to Livestock and 
Other Resources in Louisiana (2016); EA: Mammal Damage Management in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
(2015); EA: Reducing Mammal Damage in the State of North Carolina (2015); EA: Mammal Damage Management 
in the State of Rhode Island (2014); EA: Mammal Damage Management in Arkansas (2013); Decision and Finding 
of No Significant Impact: Reducing Mammal Damage through an Integrated Wildlife Damage Management 
Program in the State of New Jersey (2004); Decision and Finding of No Significant Impact for Management of 
Coyote, Dog, and Red Fox on Livestock in the Commonwealth of Virginia (2002); Environmental Assessment and 
Decision/Finding of No Significant Impact for Predator Damage Management in the College Station Animal 
Damage Control District Texas (1997). 
 
9 
 
See R.L. Crabtree and J.W. Sheldon, Coyotes and Canid Coexistence in Yellowstone (1999); F.F. 
Knowlton, Preliminary Interpretations of Coyote Population Mechanics with Some Management 
Implications, 36 J. Wildlife Mgmt. 369 (1972). In sum, recent research clearly shows that litter 
survival over time is a more robust indicator of mortality rates than litter birth size. This is 
particularly relevant to the contents of the challenged study as coyote populations
Text Len: 1701
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
Knowlton, Preliminary Interpretations of Coyote Population Mechanics with Some Management 
Implications, 36 J. Wildlife Mgmt. 369 (1972). In sum, recent research clearly shows that litter 
survival over time is a more robust indicator of mortality rates than litter birth size. This is 
particularly relevant to the contents of the challenged study as coyote populations are self-
regulated by prey availability and territoriality (i.e., guarding home range areas from other 
packs); as a result, litter survival is directly related to artificially lowered population densities 
caused by lethal control. 
 
This simply means that, on average, coyote litter size changes minimally following an 
increase in mortality, but litter survival over time does improve with increased mortality, which 
likely compensates for reduced survival of adults. A simple mechanism to explain this is that 
there is a greater energy cost to successfully raise offspring than to produce them, and increased 
mortality of adults likely causes the food supply to increase in an area, allowing for greater litter 
survival. While it is important to stress how vigorously coyote populations compensate for 
population reductions, this is a common characteristic for a density dependent (i.e., territorial) 
species. See R. Crabtree, Scientific Opinion Letter for Predator Defense: “What Effect does 
Reduction of Coyotes (older than 6 months) have on the Remaining Population?” (1997, revised 
2012), http://predatordefense.org/docs/coyotes_letter_Dr_Crabtree_06-21-12.pdf.  However, the 
bottom line is that if litter sizes do not increase to the degree stated in Figure 3, then there will be 
less coyotes born and hence a smaller population size and population recovery under Connolly 
and Longh
Text Len: 1777
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
predatordefense.org/docs/coyotes_letter_Dr_Crabtree_06-21-12.pdf.  However, the 
bottom line is that if litter sizes do not increase to the degree stated in Figure 3, then there will be 
less coyotes born and hence a smaller population size and population recovery under Connolly 
and Longhurst’s model.  
 
Furthermore, it is evident that the Connolly and Longhurst study lacks an acceptable level 
of objectivity because the experimental design of the study specifically seeks to model how to 
effectively eradicate coyote populations for the benefit of livestock producers.  Therefore, the 
study has a built-in bias favoring eradication.  It also lacks the benefit of a growing body of 
subsequently developed evidence of the negative ecological and behavioral consequences of 
carnivore hunting and eradication programs. See Estes, J.A., et al. 2011. Trophic downgrading of 
planet earth. Science 333: 301–306; Gilbert et al. 2016, Socioeconomic benefits of large 
carnivore recolonization through reduced wildlife-vehicle collisions, Conservation Letters DOI: 
10.1111/conl.12280; Ripple et al. 2014, Status and ecological effects of the world’s largest 
carnivores, Science 343: 151–162; Robinson et al. 2008, Sink populations in large carnivore 
management: cougar demography in a hunted population, Ecological Applications 18(4): 1028-
1037. Hunting pressure on large carnivore populations can have disruptive effects on social 
structure, movement patterns, and behavior, which can undermine their ecological role as 
predators. Ordiz et al., 2013, Saving large carnivores, but losing the apex predator? Biological 
Cons
Text Len: 1630
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
gar demography in a hunted population, Ecological Applications 18(4): 1028-
1037. Hunting pressure on large carnivore populations can have disruptive effects on social 
structure, movement patterns, and behavior, which can undermine their ecological role as 
predators. Ordiz et al., 2013, Saving large carnivores, but losing the apex predator? Biological 
Conservation 168: 128-133. Moreover, heavily hunted wolves have higher stress and 
reproductive steroids/hormones than individuals with lower hunting pressure, supporting the 
theory of social and physiological consequences to sentient animals, like canids, of human-
caused mortality such as sport hunting. Bryan, H., et al., Heavily hunted wolves have higher 
stress and reproductive steroids than wolves with lower hunting pressure, Functional Ecology, 
2014, 1-10, doi: 10.1111/1365-2435.12354. Lethal control programs targeting coyotes can also 
disrupt population dynamics for other, smaller predators, resulting in increased predation and 
nest failure for species like the greater sage-grouse. Mezquida et al., 2006, Sage-Grouse and 
 
10 
 
Indirect Interaction:  Potential Implications of Coyote Control on Sage-Grouse Populations, 
Condor 108.4, 747-759. The authors of this study noted that the effects of stress are often subtle, 
but the resulting harm can be acute, chronic, and permanent, sometimes spanning generations. Id. 
 
Additionally, recent research suggests that lethal control may generate public opposition 
to wildlife managers, undermine positive attitudes toward wildlife and result in the devaluation 
of large carnivores such as wolves and coyotes. Bruskotter, J. T., J. J. Vaske, and R. H. Schmidt. 

Text Len: 1690
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and permanent, sometimes spanning generations. Id. 
 
Additionally, recent research suggests that lethal control may generate public opposition 
to wildlife managers, undermine positive attitudes toward wildlife and result in the devaluation 
of large carnivores such as wolves and coyotes. Bruskotter, J. T., J. J. Vaske, and R. H. Schmidt. 
2009, Social and Cognitive Correlates of Utah Residents' Acceptance of the Lethal Control of 
Wolves, Human Dimensions of Wildlife 14:119-132; Treves A., L. Naughton-Treves, and V.  
Shelley, 2013, Longitudinal analysis of attitudes toward wolves, Conservation Biology 27: 315-
323; Treves, et al., 2015, Predators and the Public Trust, Biological Reviews 92: 248-270. 
Research has discovered that American public acceptance of lethal methods of predator control 
has declined over the past two decades, with people increasingly finding lethal methods 
inhumane. Slagle et al., 2017, Attitudes toward predator control in the United States: 1995 and 
2014, Journal of Mammalogy, 98, 7-16.  In fact, a study in Massachusetts found that voters 
overwhelmingly opposed coyote hunting practices once they became aware of them. Jackman, J. 
L., and J. G. Way, 2017, Once I found out: Awareness of and attitudes toward coyote hunting 
policies in Massachusetts, Human Dimensions of Wildlife, DOI: 
10.1080/10871209.2017.1397824. Thus, the American Society of Mammalogists recently 
published a series of papers presenting new evidence of the greater efficacy and social 
acceptability of nonlethal deterrents to livestock depredation by large carnivores, as well as the 
lack of justification for and possible harm to populations
Text Len: 1667
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 DOI: 
10.1080/10871209.2017.1397824. Thus, the American Society of Mammalogists recently 
published a series of papers presenting new evidence of the greater efficacy and social 
acceptability of nonlethal deterrents to livestock depredation by large carnivores, as well as the 
lack of justification for and possible harm to populations and ecosystems resulting from lethal 
control of these predators. Bergstrom, B.J., 2017, Carnivore conservation: shifting the paradigm 
from control to coexistence, Journal of Mammalogy 98: 1-6. This followed research by Treves et 
al. (2016) that recommended suspending lethal predator control methods, especially by publicly 
funded government programs, which do not currently have rigorous evidence for functional 
effectiveness in preventing predation, until gold-standard tests are completed. Treves, A., M. 
Krofel, and J. McManus, 2016, Predator control should not be a shot in the dark, Frontiers of 
Ecology and Environment 14(7): 380–388, doi:10.1002/fee.1312.  Reliance on the outdated 
Connelly and Longhurst study results in ignoring all of this more recent research and its 
conclusions. 
 
In sum, due to advances in coyote and carnivore research, the antiquated Connolly and 
Longhurst data is largely unreliable and lacks utility for making determinations regarding 
coyotes. Its use must be discontinued to achieve compliance with USDA Information Quality 
guidelines. 
 
II. THE CHALLENGED INFORMATION IS INFLUENTIAL AND MUST MEET 
HIGHER STANDARDS 
  
 In addition to not meeting the basic standards stated above, the Connolly and Longhurst 
study does not meet the higher
Text Len: 1631
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
coyotes. Its use must be discontinued to achieve compliance with USDA Information Quality 
guidelines. 
 
II. THE CHALLENGED INFORMATION IS INFLUENTIAL AND MUST MEET 
HIGHER STANDARDS 
  
 In addition to not meeting the basic standards stated above, the Connolly and Longhurst 
study does not meet the higher standards for influential information. Information is influential 
when it is has a broad impact, such as affecting a wide range of parties (i.e., an entire industry), 
 
11 
 
rather than solely one company, and when its impact is intense, meaning that it has a large 
impact on affected parties. USDA Guidelines, Background, USDA's Definition of Influential 
Scientific, Financial, or Statistical Information.10   
 
Under the USDA definition, the Connolly and Longhurst study is undoubtedly influential 
in agency decision making. It has affected a broad range of parties, from wildlife biologists and 
veterinarians to farmers and loggers, as well as wildlife enthusiasts and visitors to public lands.  
It has had an intense impact, illustrated by the fact that USDA Wildlife Services spent over $1.13 
billion in federal tax dollars on wildlife extermination efforts between 2004 and 2013.11 The 
disputed study has informed coyote lethal control efforts and carnivore hunting policy for 
decades, despite being outdated and not peer reviewed, by being eternally regurgitated to support 
killing of up to 70% of a coyote population.12 Furthermore, due to USDA’s consistent reliance 
upon this study, its dissemination by this agency has also resulted in the widespread use of this 
study to establish liberal and excessive coyote and coywolf hunting policies by DOI and state 
game agencies across the country. See e.g., Ronald A. Thompson
Text Len: 1754
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

killing of up to 70% of a coyote population.12 Furthermore, due to USDA’s consistent reliance 
upon this study, its dissemination by this agency has also resulted in the widespread use of this 
study to establish liberal and excessive coyote and coywolf hunting policies by DOI and state 
game agencies across the country. See e.g., Ronald A. Thompson, The Cost of Predator Damage 
Control Using Trapping as the Primary Control Technique, Proceedings of the 7th Vertebrate 
Pest Conference 146 (1976);  National Park Service, Cape Cod National Seashore Hunting 
Program, Final Environmental Impact Statement, Cape Cod National Seashore, MA, 72 Fed. 
Reg. 44,176 (Aug. 7, 2007); EA: Mammal Damage Management in the Commonwealth of 
Massachusetts (2015). This dissemination to other federal and state agencies is significant and 
influential since Wildlife Services maintains a very close working relationship with state 
agriculture and wildlife agencies.  See, USDA APHIS Wildlife Services Directive, 3.101 and 
3.102. 
 
 The USDA’s Office of Inspector General formally acknowledges on its website that 
“influential information is subject to an added level of scrutiny.”13  According to the Department 
of the Agriculture’s guidelines, influential scientific information related to human health, safety, 
and the environment must “use the best available science and supporting studies conducted in 
accordance with sound and objective scientific practices,” and “use data collected by accepted 
methods or best available methods.” USDA Guidelines, Scientific Research, Part II. As a 42 year 
old non-peer reviewed speculative modeling study, it is evident that the Connolly and Longhurst 
             
Text Len: 1705
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
accordance with sound and objective scientific practices,” and “use data collected by accepted 
methods or best available methods.” USDA Guidelines, Scientific Research, Part II. As a 42 year 
old non-peer reviewed speculative modeling study, it is evident that the Connolly and Longhurst 
                                                           
10 Available at https://www.ocio.usda.gov/policy-directives-records-forms/guidelines-quality-
information/background 
11 See http://www.humanesociety.org/assets/pdfs/wildlife/USDA-wildlife-services-kill-data-2004-2013.pdf  
12 See e.g., FN5 supra, USDA, 5 Year Environmental Monitoring Review for Predator Damage Management in 
Montana: FY 2002 through FY 2006 (2007), 3-4; See also, Final EA:  Predator Damage and Conflict Management 
in Idaho (2016); Final EA: Reducing Coyote Damage to Livestock and Other Resources in Louisiana  (2016); EA: 
Mammal Damage Management in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts (2015); EA: Reducing Mammal Damage in 
the State of North Carolina (2015); EA: Mammal Damage Management in the State of Rhode Island (2014); EA: 
Mammal Damage Management in Arkansas (2013); Decision and Finding of No Significant Impact: Reducing 
Mammal Damage through an Integrated Wildlife Damage Management Program in the State of New Jersey  (2004); 
Decision and Finding of No Significant Impact for Management of Coyote, Dog, and Red
Text Len: 1398
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Mammal Damage Management in the State of Rhode Island (2014); EA: 
Mammal Damage Management in Arkansas (2013); Decision and Finding of No Significant Impact: Reducing 
Mammal Damage through an Integrated Wildlife Damage Management Program in the State of New Jersey  (2004); 
Decision and Finding of No Significant Impact for Management of Coyote, Dog, and Red Fox on Livestock in the 
Commonwealth of Virginia (2002); Environmental Assessment and Decision/Finding of No Significant Impact for 
Predator Damage Management in the College Station Animal Damage Control District Texas  (1997). 
13 Office of Inspector General Information Quality Guidelines, Standards for Disseminated Information,  
http://www.usda.gov/oig/qltyguidelinesrev.htm. 
 
12 
 
study does not come close to meeting the USDA’s requirements for the use of the best available 
science nor does it reflect data collected through the best available methods. Over the past 42 
years, there have been significantly more detailed and academically rigorous studies dealing with 
coyote reproduction, population density, efficacy of lethal control, and effects of hybridization 
on canid populations.14 Therefore, USDA lacks any justifiable reason to continue reliance upon 
this study in its decision-making concerning lethal control of coyote populations. 
 
USDA’s Data Quality Act standards also require USDA to “[d]isseminate influential 
scientific information with a high degree of transparency about data and methods to facilitate its 
reproducibility by qualified third parties.” Id.  However, the challenged study is not readily 
available to the public and PEER was only able to obtain a copy of this study through an inter-
library loan with the University of Arkansas, seemingly the only place where this study could be 

Text Len: 1801
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 with a high degree of transparency about data and methods to facilitate its 
reproducibility by qualified third parties.” Id.  However, the challenged study is not readily 
available to the public and PEER was only able to obtain a copy of this study through an inter-
library loan with the University of Arkansas, seemingly the only place where this study could be 
found, as it was unavailable on any USDA website, common research databases, or the broader 
internet. 
 
Based on the allegations above, it is clear that the USDA has developed its coyote control 
and hunting policies relying upon outdated information from the challenged study that is not the 
“best available science.” Because it is influential information, the agency must review the paper 
with heightened scrutiny, which should result in not using it in future documents, and retracting 
it from previous ones. 
 
III. PETITIONERS ARE AFFECTED BY THE INFORMATION ERRORS 
 
 Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility (“PEER”) is a non-profit public 
interest organization incorporated in Washington, D.C. and headquartered in Silver Spring, 
Maryland, with field offices in California, Colorado, Florida, Massachusetts, and Tennessee. 
Among other public interest projects, PEER engages in advocacy, research, education, and 
litigation to promote public understanding and debate concerning key current environmental 
policy issues.  PEER focuses on the environment, including the regulation and remediation of 
toxic substances, public lands, natural resource and wildlife management, public funding of 
environmental and natural resource agencies, scientific integrity, and ethics in government.  
Furthermore, PEER members include wildlife biologists who study large mammalian carnivores 
and are directly impacted by the USDA’s reliance upon and dissemination of improper data to 
establish coyote
Text Len: 1882
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 remediation of 
toxic substances, public lands, natural resource and wildlife management, public funding of 
environmental and natural resource agencies, scientific integrity, and ethics in government.  
Furthermore, PEER members include wildlife biologists who study large mammalian carnivores 
and are directly impacted by the USDA’s reliance upon and dissemination of improper data to 
establish coyote eradication, control, and hunting policies. 
 
 Additionally, the policy undergirded by the challenged study touches on a number of 
PEER’s traditional concerns.  Natural resource management, management of public lands and 
public trust resources including wildlife, and environmental stewardship more generally are all 
implicated by predator management by the USDA.  PEER believes that the USDA has not 
utilized the best available science, as required by law, in developing an appropriate, science-
based strategy for managing and considering the ecological importance of carnivores, such as 
                                                           
14 See Appendix A. 
 
13 
 
coyotes. Nor has the agency considered the importance of undisturbed populations of carnivores 
on the ecosystem or the ecological stability of agricultural lands and their surrounding 
environments.  PEER values the presence of wild animals necessary for a healthy environment.  
While PEER supports management efforts backed by sound scientific principles, the USDA’s 
current reliance on unreliable information has led to the mismanagement of a group of wild 
carnivores that PEER has an interest in protecting. 
 
The Humane Society of the United States (“
Text Len: 1651
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ER values the presence of wild animals necessary for a healthy environment.  
While PEER supports management efforts backed by sound scientific principles, the USDA’s 
current reliance on unreliable information has led to the mismanagement of a group of wild 
carnivores that PEER has an interest in protecting. 
 
The Humane Society of the United States (“The HSUS”) is the nation’s largest animal 
protection organization, headquartered in Washington, D.C. Since its establishment in 1954, The 
HSUS has worked to combat animal abuse and exploitation and promote animal welfare through 
research, public outreach and education, advocacy and litigation. The HSUS strives to protect 
wildlife and improve wildlife management throughout the country, and has long advocated 
coexistence and nonlethal alternatives to predator control, which often relies on inhumane 
techniques such as leg-hold traps, snares, and poisons like sodium cyanide, sodium nitrate and 
Compound 1080. USDA’s continued reliance on and dissemination of the challenged 
information harms The HSUS and its members’ interest in native carnivore conservation and 
prevention of animal suffering by promoting lethal predator control in a manner that is not 
supported by the best available science. 
 
Predator Defense is a national nonprofit advocacy organization funded primarily by 
member donations. It promotes non-lethal predator control that helps people and preserves 
wildlife, as well as monitors and challenges state and federal wildlife management policies that 
adversely affect predator species. Predator Defense works with these agencies in their efforts to 
protect native predators and when necessary, pursues litigation that requires agencies to follow 
laws and regulations established to protect native predators. 
Project Coyote is a national non-profit organization based in Northern California whose 
mission is to promote compassionate conservation and coexistence between
Text Len: 1964
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 federal wildlife management policies that 
adversely affect predator species. Predator Defense works with these agencies in their efforts to 
protect native predators and when necessary, pursues litigation that requires agencies to follow 
laws and regulations established to protect native predators. 
Project Coyote is a national non-profit organization based in Northern California whose 
mission is to promote compassionate conservation and coexistence between people and wildlife 
through education, science and advocacy. Its representatives, advisory board members and 
supporters include scientists, educators, ranchers and citizen leaders who work together to 
change laws and policies to protect native carnivores from abuse and mismanagement, 
advocating coexistence instead of killing. Project Coyote seeks to change negative attitudes 
toward coyotes, wolves and other misunderstood predators by replacing ignorance and fear with 
understanding, respect and appreciation. 
The Center for Biological Diversity believes that the welfare of human beings is deeply 
linked to nature — to the existence in our world of a vast diversity of wild animals and 
plants. Because diversity has intrinsic value, and because its loss impoverishes society, CBD 
works to secure a future for all species, great and small, hovering on the brink of extinction. 
CBD does so through science, law and creative media, with a focus on protecting the lands, 
waters and climate that species need to survive. 
The Animal Legal Defense Fund’s mission is to protect the lives and advance the 
interests of animals through the legal system. ALDF accomplishes this mission by filing high-
 
14 
 
impact lawsuits to protect animals from harm, providing free legal assistance and training to 
prosecutors to assure that animal abusers are punished for their crimes, supporting tough animal 
protection legislation and fighting legislation harmful to animals, and providing resources and 
opportunities to law students and professionals to advance
Text Len: 2030
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. ALDF accomplishes this mission by filing high-
 
14 
 
impact lawsuits to protect animals from harm, providing free legal assistance and training to 
prosecutors to assure that animal abusers are punished for their crimes, supporting tough animal 
protection legislation and fighting legislation harmful to animals, and providing resources and 
opportunities to law students and professionals to advance the emerging field of animal law. 
Since its founding in 1951, Animal Welfare Institute has sought to alleviate the suffering 
inflicted on animals by people. A major AWI effort is the quest to end the torture inflicted on 
furbearing animals by steel jaw leghold traps and wire snares. 
The National Wolfwatcher Coalition is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit, all volunteer organization. 
It educates, advocates, and participates for the long term recovery and the preservation of wolves 
based on the best available science and the principles of democracy. NWC educates the public, 
advocates for science-based decision making at every level of government and participate in 
activities that promote citizens’ awareness and participation in the decision-making process 
about wolves. It is a moderate organization that seeks to (1) find common ground among all 
stakeholders and (2) encourage solutions to roadblocks that challenge wolf recovery. 
Western Watersheds Project is a nonprofit environmental conservation group with 
1,500 members founded in 1993 and has field offices in Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, Arizona, 
Utah, Nevada and California. WWP works to influence and improve public lands management 
throughout the West with a primary focus on the negative impacts of livestock grazing on 250 
million acres of western public lands, including harm to ecological, biological, cultural, historic, 
archeological, scenic resources, wilderness values, roadless areas, Wilderness Study Areas and 
Text Len: 1895
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Arizona, 
Utah, Nevada and California. WWP works to influence and improve public lands management 
throughout the West with a primary focus on the negative impacts of livestock grazing on 250 
million acres of western public lands, including harm to ecological, biological, cultural, historic, 
archeological, scenic resources, wilderness values, roadless areas, Wilderness Study Areas and 
designated Wilderness. 
Protect the Wolves is a Native American Religious 501(c)(3) nonprofit that uses Tribal 
Treaty Rights to speak for wildlife. It hosts a wolf sanctuary where wolves can reside in a safe 
place, fights for the end of lethal control efforts on public lands, and promotes responsible 
animal husbandry practices in order to avoid conflicts between ranchers and wolves. 
Coyote Watch Canada is a Federal Not-For-Profit community-based, wildlife 
organization which advocates positive human wildlife experiences. It collaborates with a broad 
range of stakeholders to develop and implement of non-lethal, sustainable human-wildlife 
conflict solutions. The organization provides educational programming, a first-response team, 
on-site investigation, assessment and mitigation directives, wildlife rescue and release assistance, 
private, municipal- and provincial-level consultation, digital mapping programs, training, 
educational resources, and municipal wildlife framework models. 
Public Lands Media is an independent, non-partisan, source of ecological and 
conservation information. Its staff research, write, and publish articles, essays, and editorials on a 
variety of natural resource/environmental topics. PLM also provides information and assistance 
and links to scientists, the public, conservation groups and others so they can make better 
informed decisions on complex ecological issues. The organization’s goal is to provide 
scientifically informed perspectives on current conservation/environmental issues.  

Text Len: 1941
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 essays, and editorials on a 
variety of natural resource/environmental topics. PLM also provides information and assistance 
and links to scientists, the public, conservation groups and others so they can make better 
informed decisions on complex ecological issues. The organization’s goal is to provide 
scientifically informed perspectives on current conservation/environmental issues.  
 
15 
 
WildLands Defense’s activists’ and supporters’ on-the-ground presence, extensive 
experience enforcing existing statutory and regulatory regimes, and the group’s unparalleled 
conviction provide managers and policy-makers a clear and competent picture of the conditions 
of our public lands and wildlife communities on the ground as they exist, as well as lend 
decision-makers the sense of informed urgency as to the need for policy changes into the future. 
In Defense of Animals is an international animal protection organization with over 
250,000 valued supporters and a 30-year history of protecting animals, people and the 
environment through education, campaigns and hands on rescue facilities. It educates and 
exposes animal abuse as a root cause, symptom, and early predictor of wider societal violence. 
Its staff advocate change in laws, human behavior, and enlightenment in the need to protect lives, 
advance rights, improve welfare, and steward environmental protection. IDA cares for and 
rehabilitates lost, orphaned, abandoned, and abused animals inside three main sanctuaries.  
Center for Ecosystem Restoration is a non-profit organization headquartered in Wickford, 
R.I. that develops and leads projects and partnerships among local citizens, businesses, non-
profit organizations and government agencies. Its goal is to help communities accomplish local 
environmental and economic priorities through ecological restoration. It provides resources to 
accomplish that work
Text Len: 1896
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
uaries.  
Center for Ecosystem Restoration is a non-profit organization headquartered in Wickford, 
R.I. that develops and leads projects and partnerships among local citizens, businesses, non-
profit organizations and government agencies. Its goal is to help communities accomplish local 
environmental and economic priorities through ecological restoration. It provides resources to 
accomplish that work through technical support, grant-writing and funding development, 
outreach and other means. 
Raincoast Conservation Foundation is a team of conservationists and scientists 
empowered by their research to protect the lands, waters and wildlife of coastal British 
Columbia.  They use rigorous, peer-reviewed science and community engagement to further our 
conservation objectives.  As a charitable, non-profit conservation science organization that 
operates a research lab, research field station and a research/sailing vessel, Raincoast is unique in 
Canada. 
Founded in 1969 in Canada and in the UK in 1981, the International Fund for Animal 
Welfare saves individual animals, animal populations and habitats all over the world. With 
projects in more than 40 countries, IFAW provides hands-on assistance to animals in need, 
whether it’s dogs and cats, wildlife and livestock, or rescuing animals in the wake of disasters. 
IFAW also advocates saving populations from cruelty and depletion, such as its campaign to end 
commercial whaling and seal hunts. 
Alongside the listed organizational petitioners, petitioners include a number of the 
foremost researchers and advocates in the field of wildlife, carnivore, and canid conservation 
and/or research. As such, the continued use of faulty research to justify Agency policy directly 
impacts their interests. 
 
IV. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CORRECTION OF THE INFORMATION 
CHALLENGED
Text Len: 1841
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, petitioners include a number of the 
foremost researchers and advocates in the field of wildlife, carnivore, and canid conservation 
and/or research. As such, the continued use of faulty research to justify Agency policy directly 
impacts their interests. 
 
IV. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CORRECTION OF THE INFORMATION 
CHALLENGED BY THIS COMPLAINT 
  
 Accordingly, PEER respectfully requests the USDA APHIS take the following steps to 
comply with the Data Quality Act:  
 
16 
 
 
1. Retract from current and future agency usage the USDA-funded study: Connolly, G.E., and 
W.M. Longhurst, 1975, The effects of control on coyote populations: A simulation model, 
University of California, Division of Agricultural Sciences Bulletin, Volume 1872, 37 pp. 
  
2. Issue a public statement explaining the reasons for this retraction.  
 
3. Send a letter to other relevant USDA offices, the Department of Interior, and all state game 
agencies requesting that they refrain from relying on this retracted study for any regulatory or 
public health purpose.15  
 
 Please let us know if you require any additional information in support of this complaint 
or if there is any aspect of it that requires clarification.  
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
  
Adam Carlesco, Staff Counsel 
Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility 
962 Wayne Ave, Suite 610 
Silver Spring, MD 20910  
Tel:  202.265.7337 
Fax:  202.265.4192 
Email: acarlesco@peer.org 
 
Jonathan G. Way, Ph.D. 
Founder of Eastern
Text Len: 1486
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Staff Counsel 
Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility 
962 Wayne Ave, Suite 610 
Silver Spring, MD 20910  
Tel:  202.265.7337 
Fax:  202.265.4192 
Email: acarlesco@peer.org 
 
Jonathan G. Way, Ph.D. 
Founder of Eastern Coyote/Coywolf Research 
Co-Author of Carnivore Conservation Act of Massachusetts 
                                                           
15 In addition to continuous use by USDA, federal agencies within DOI and state game agencies have consistently 
relied upon this study or USDA NEPA material citing this study to justify large-scale coyote extermination and 
control efforts in planning and management documents. As these DOI documents utilizing this study would be 
subject to challenge during their respective comment periods, the USDA should avoid the vulnerability of numerous 
EAs by withdrawing the study from further use. Despite the plethora of data and studies that have emerged in recent 
years, federal and state game agencies continue to use a 40 year old, non -peer reviewed study for new environmental 
assessments to justify large-scale extermination and loosely regulated hunting of coyote populations. See e.g., 
National Park Service, Cape Cod National Seashore Hunting Program, Final Environmental Impact Statement, 
Cape Cod National Seashore, MA, 72 Fed. Reg. 44,176 (Aug. 7, 2007); Bureau of Land Management, Predator 
Hunt Derby #DOI-BLM-ID-I000-2014-0002-EA, Nov. 2014, https://eplan
Text Len: 1447
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Park Service, Cape Cod National Seashore Hunting Program, Final Environmental Impact Statement, 
Cape Cod National Seashore, MA, 72 Fed. Reg. 44,176 (Aug. 7, 2007); Bureau of Land Management, Predator 
Hunt Derby #DOI-BLM-ID-I000-2014-0002-EA, Nov. 2014, https://eplanning.blm.gov/epl-front-
office/projects/nepa/39720/51280/55821/SRP_Derby_EA_Final_508.pdf ; Nevada Animal Damage Control 
Program 2005 Work Plan for Nevada Public Lands (2005).  

 
17 
 
Osterville, MA 
 
Louise Kane, J.D. 
Justice for Wolves and Co-Author of Carnivore Conservation Act of Massachusetts 
Eastham, MA 
 
 
Co-Signatories: 
Scientists and Advocates 
Jane Goodall, Ph.D., DBE 
Founder, the Jane Goodall Institute 
United Nations Messenger of Peace 
Carter Niemeyer 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Biologist, Wildlife Services (retired) 
Boise, Idaho 
Adrian Treves, Ph.D. 
Professor, Nelson Institute for Environmental Studies 
University of Wisconsin–Madison 
Robert Wielgus, Ph.D. 
Professor, Director of the Large Carnivore Conservation Lab 
Washington State University 
Marc Bekoff, Ph.D. 
Professor Emeritus of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology 
University of Colorado, Boulder 
Bradley J. Bergstrom, Ph.D. 
Professor of Biology 
Valdosta State University 
Alexandra Horowitz, Ph.D. 
Adjunct Associate Professor,
Text Len: 1300
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ore Conservation Lab 
Washington State University 
Marc Bekoff, Ph.D. 
Professor Emeritus of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology 
University of Colorado, Boulder 
Bradley J. Bergstrom, Ph.D. 
Professor of Biology 
Valdosta State University 
Alexandra Horowitz, Ph.D. 
Adjunct Associate Professor, Canid Cognition 
Barnard College 
Paul Paquet, Ph.D 
Large Carnivore Biologist  
Canada  
Garrick Dutcher 
Research and Program Director 
Living with Wolves 
Doug Peacock  
President, Save the Yellowstone Grizzly  
Board Chair, Round River Conservation Studies 
Emigrant, Montana 
 
18 
 
Robin Bruckner  
NOAA Habitat Biologist (retired) 
Silver Spring, Maryland  
John Maguranis 
Project Coyote, Massachusetts Representative 
Belmont Animal Control Officer 
Founding Board Member for Missing Dogs Massachusetts 
Waltham, Massachusetts 
David Parsons 
Carnivore Conservation Biologist 
The Rewilding Institute 
Albuquerque, NM 
Laela Sayigh 
Biologist, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution 
Woods Hole, Massachusetts 
Virginia Fuller 
Former President, New England Wildlife Center 
Belmont, Massachusetts 
Mike Ruzich 
Science teacher, B.S. Biology  
Contributed to and modeled International Wolf Center’s “Of Wolves and Gray Matter” curriculum.  
Ely, Minnesota (in Superior National Forest on the edge of the Boundary Waters Canoe Area, in the 
middle of wolf Country) 
 
Organizations 
The Humane Society of the United States 
1255 23rd Street, NW
Text Len: 1445
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Contributed to and modeled International Wolf Center’s “Of Wolves and Gray Matter” curriculum.  
Ely, Minnesota (in Superior National Forest on the edge of the Boundary Waters Canoe Area, in the 
middle of wolf Country) 
 
Organizations 
The Humane Society of the United States 
1255 23rd Street, NW, Suite 450  
Washington, DC 20037 
Predator Defense  
Brooks Fahy, Executive Director  
P.O. Box 5446 
Eugene, Oregon 97405 
brooks@predatordefense.org  
Project Coyote 
Camilla H. Fox, Founder & Executive Director 
P.O. Box 5007  
Larkspur, California 94977  
Center for Biological Diversity 
P.O. Box 710 
Tucson, Arizona 85702-0710 
 
19 
 
Animal Legal Defense Fund 
Stephen Wells, Executive Director 
525 E Cotati Ave  
Cotati, California 94931 
Animal Welfare Institute 
Nancy Blaney, Director of Government Affairs 
900 Pennsylvania Ave., SE 
Washington, DC 20003 
International Fund for Animal Welfare 
Carson Barylak, Campaigns Officer 
1400 16th Street, NW, Suite 510 
Washington, DC 20036 
National Wolfwatcher Coalition 
Nancy Warren, Executive Director  
Duluth, Minnesota 
Western Watersheds Project 
Eric Molvar, Executive Director 
126 S. Main St, Ste B2 
P.O. Box 1770 
Hailey, Idaho 83333 
Protect The Wolves™ 
Patricia Herman, President 
Roger Dobson, Director 
18175 Hayes Way
Text Len: 1297
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, Executive Director  
Duluth, Minnesota 
Western Watersheds Project 
Eric Molvar, Executive Director 
126 S. Main St, Ste B2 
P.O. Box 1770 
Hailey, Idaho 83333 
Protect The Wolves™ 
Patricia Herman, President 
Roger Dobson, Director 
18175 Hayes Way 
Cottonwood, California  96022 
Coyote Watch Canada - Community Outreach Team 
Lesley Sampson, Founding Executive Director 
266 Four Mile Creek Rd  
Niagara-on-the-Lake, ON L0S 1J0 
Public Lands Media  
George Wuerthner 
Bend, Oregon  
WildLands Defense 
Natalie Ertz, Executive Director 
Hailey, Idaho 
In Defense of Animals 
President Marilyn Kroplick, MD 
Lisa Levinson, Sustainable Activism Campaign Director 
San Rafael, California 
 
20 
 
Center for Ecosystem Restoration 
Thomas Ardito, Director 
Saunderstown, Rhode Island 
Northeast Oregon Ecosystems 
Wally Sykes, Director  
Joseph, Oregon 
captmayo@eoni.com 
Raincoast Conservation Foundation 
Chris Genovali, Executive Director 
PO Box 2429 
Sidney, British Columbia V8L 3Y3 
Email: chris@raincoast.org  
 
21 
 
Appendix A 
Relevant Recent Coyote Population Research and Related Literature 
 
Berger, K.M. 2006. Carnivore-livestock conflicts: effects of subsidized predator control and 
economic correlates on the sheep industry. Conservation Biology 20(3):751-761. 
Bromley
Text Len: 1290
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.org  
 
21 
 
Appendix A 
Relevant Recent Coyote Population Research and Related Literature 
 
Berger, K.M. 2006. Carnivore-livestock conflicts: effects of subsidized predator control and 
economic correlates on the sheep industry. Conservation Biology 20(3):751-761. 
Bromley, C., and E. M. Gese. 2001. Effects of sterilization on territory fidelity and maintenance, 
pair bonds, and survival rates of free-ranging coyotes. Canadian Journal of Zoology 
79:386-392. 
Brainerd, S.M., H. Andren, E.E. Bangs, E.H. Bradley, J.A. Fontaine, et al. 2008. The effects of 
breeder loss on wolves. Journal of Wildlife Management 72: 89–98. 
Conner, M. M., M. M. Jaeger, T. J. Weller, and D. R. McCullough. 1998. Effect of coyote 
removal on sheep depredation in northern California. Journal of Wildlife Management 
62:690-699. 
Crabtree, R. 2012. Scientific Opinion Letter: "What effect does reduction of coyotes (older than 6 
months) have on the remaining population?" 5 pages. URL: 
http://www.projectcoyote.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/05/Crabtree_coyote_letter_PC_April_2013.pdf. 
Crabtree, R.L., and J.D. Varley. 1995. The ecological and sociodemographic role of the coyote 
on Yellowstone’s Northern Range. Pp. 63-84, In Proceedings of the 3rd biennial science 
conference on the Greater
Text Len: 1285
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
tree_coyote_letter_PC_April_2013.pdf. 
Crabtree, R.L., and J.D. Varley. 1995. The ecological and sociodemographic role of the coyote 
on Yellowstone’s Northern Range. Pp. 63-84, In Proceedings of the 3rd biennial science 
conference on the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, Greater Yellowstone’s Predators. 
Yellowstone National Park and Northern Rockies Conservation Cooperative, Mammoth, 
WY. 
Crabtree, R.L., and J.W. Sheldon. 1999. The ecological role of coyotes on Yellowstone's 
Northern Range. Yellowstone Science 7:15-24. 
Crooks, K.R., and M.E. Soule. 1999. Mesopredator release and avifaunal extinctions in a 
fragmented system. Nature 400:563-566. 
Estes, J.A., et al. 2011. Trophic downgrading of planet earth. Science 333: 301–306. 
Gehring, T. M., K. C. VerCauteren, and J.-M. Landry. 2010. Livestock Protection Dogs in the 
21st Century: Is an Ancient Tool Relevant to Modern Conservation Challenges? 
BioScience 60(4):299-308. 
Gehrt, S.D., S.P.D. Riley, and B.L. Cypher (Eds). 2010. Urban carnivores: ecology, conflict, and 
conservation. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD. 
Gese, E. M. 1998. Response of neighboring Coyotes (Canis latrans) to social disruption in an 
adjacent pack. Canadian Journal of Zoology 76: 1960-1963. 
Gese, E. M
Text Len: 1264
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 (Eds). 2010. Urban carnivores: ecology, conflict, and 
conservation. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD. 
Gese, E. M. 1998. Response of neighboring Coyotes (Canis latrans) to social disruption in an 
adjacent pack. Canadian Journal of Zoology 76: 1960-1963. 
Gese, E. M., R. L. Ruff, R. L. Crabtree. 1996. Foraging ecology of coyotes (Canis latrans): the 
influence of extrinsic factors and a dominance hierarchy. Canadian Journal of Zoology 
74:769-783. 
Gilbert, S.L., K.J. Sivy, C.B. Pozzanghera, A. DuBour, K. Overduijn, M.M. Smith, J. Zhou, J.M. 
Little, and L.R. Prugh 2016. Socioeconomic benefits of large carnivore recolonization 
through reduced wildlife-vehicle collisions. Conservation Letters 
DOI: 10.1111/conl.12280.  
Harrison, D. J. 1992a. Dispersal characteristics of juvenile coyotes in Maine. Journal of Wildlife 
Management 56: 128-138. 
Harrison, D.J. 1992b.  Social ecology of coyotes in northeastern North America: Relationships to 
dispersal, food resources, and human exploitation. Pages 53-72 in A. H. Boer, editor. 
 
22 
 
Ecology and management of the Eastern Coyote.  Wildlife Research Unit, University of 
New Brunswick, Fredericton, Canada. 
Henke, S.E., and F.C. Bryant. 1999. Effects of coyote removal on the faunal community in 
western
Text Len: 1283
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 in A. H. Boer, editor. 
 
22 
 
Ecology and management of the Eastern Coyote.  Wildlife Research Unit, University of 
New Brunswick, Fredericton, Canada. 
Henke, S.E., and F.C. Bryant. 1999. Effects of coyote removal on the faunal community in 
western Texas. Journal of Wildlife Management 63:1066-1081. 
Hornocker, M., and S. Negri, 2010. Cougar Ecology & Conservation. The University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago, USA. 
Knowlton, F. F., E. M. Gese, and M. M. Jaeger. 1999. Coyote depredation control: an interface 
between biology and management. Journal of Range Management 52: 398-412. 
Mech, L. D., and L. Boitani, editors. 2003. Wolves: behavior, ecology, and conservation. 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois, USA. 
Mezguida, E.T., S.J. Slater, and C.W. Benkman. 2006. Sage-grouse and indirect interactions: 
potential implications of coyote control on sage-grouse populations. The Condor 
108:747-759. 
Mitchell, B.R., M.M. Jaeger, and R.H. Barrett. 2004. Coyote depredation management: Current 
methods and research needs. Wildlife Society Bulletin 32: 1209-1218. 
Parker, G.R. 1995. Eastern Coyote: The Story of Its Success. Nimbus Publishing, Halifax, NS. 
Patterson, B.R., and F. Messier.  2001.  Social organization and space use of coyotes in eastern 
Canada relative to
Text Len: 1296
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
methods and research needs. Wildlife Society Bulletin 32: 1209-1218. 
Parker, G.R. 1995. Eastern Coyote: The Story of Its Success. Nimbus Publishing, Halifax, NS. 
Patterson, B.R., and F. Messier.  2001.  Social organization and space use of coyotes in eastern 
Canada relative to prey distribution and abundance. Journal of Mammalogy 82:463-477. 
Peebles, K.A., R.B. Wielgus, B.T. Maletzke, and M.E. Swanson. 2013. Effects of remedial sport 
hunting on cougar complaints and livestock depredations. PloS ONE. DOI: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0079713.  
Poessel, S.A., E.M. Gese, and J.K. Young. 2017. Environmental factors influencing the 
occurrence of coyotes and conflicts in urban areas. Landscape and Urban Planning 157: 
259–269. 
Povilitis, T. 2016. Compassionate Conservation for Yellowstone's Wolves. Nature Areas Journal 
36(3): 334-338. 
Proulx, G., and D. Rodtka. 2015. Predator Bounties in Western Canada Cause Animal Suffering 
and Compromise Wildlife Conservation Efforts. Animals 5:1034-1046. 
Ramp, D., and M. Bekoff. 2015.  Compassion as a Practical and Evolved Ethic for 
Conservation. BioScience 65: 323-327. 
Ripple, W.J., J.A. Estes, R.L. Beschta, C.C. Wilmers, E.G. Ritchie, M. Hebblewhite, J. Berger
Text Len: 1218
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. Bekoff. 2015.  Compassion as a Practical and Evolved Ethic for 
Conservation. BioScience 65: 323-327. 
Ripple, W.J., J.A. Estes, R.L. Beschta, C.C. Wilmers, E.G. Ritchie, M. Hebblewhite, J. Berger, 
B. Elmhagen, M. Letnic, M.P. Nelson, O.J. Schmitz, D.W. Smith, A.D. Wallach, and A.J. 
Wirsing. 2014. Status and ecological effects of the world’s largest carnivores. Science 
343: 151–162. 
Sacks, B. N., K. M. Blejwas, and M. M. Jaeger. 1999a. Relative vulnerability of coyotes to 
removal methods on a northern California ranch. Journal of Wildlife Management 
63:939-949. 
Sacks, B. N., M. M. Jaeger, J. C. C. Neale, and D. R. McCullough. 1999b. Territoriality and 
breeding status of coyotes relative to sheep predation. Journal of Wildlife Management 
63:593-605. 
Sargeant, G. A., and R. L. Ruff. 2001. Demographic response of Black Bears at Cold Lake, 
Alberta, to the removal of adult males. Ursus 12: 59-68. 
Stolzenberg, W. 2008. Where the wild things were: life, death, and ecological wreckage in a 
land of vanishing predators. Bloomsbury USA, New York. 291 pages. 
Treves, A., G. Chapron, J.V. Lopez-Bao, C. Shoemaker,
Text Len: 1132
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. Ursus 12: 59-68. 
Stolzenberg, W. 2008. Where the wild things were: life, death, and ecological wreckage in a 
land of vanishing predators. Bloomsbury USA, New York. 291 pages. 
Treves, A., G. Chapron, J.V. Lopez-Bao, C. Shoemaker, A.R. Goeckner, and J.T. Bruskotter. 
2015. Predators and the Public Trust. Biological Reviews 92: 248-270. 
 
23 
 
Treves, A., M. Krofel, and J. McManus. 2016. Predator control should not be a shot in the dark. 
Frontiers of Ecology and Environment 14(7): 380–388, doi:10.1002/fee.1312 
Van Eeden, L. M., et al. 2017. Managing conflict between large carnivores and livestock, 
Conservation Biology, doi: 10.1111/cobi.12959 
Vucetich, J., and M.P. Nelson. 2014. Wolf hunting and the ethics of predator control. Political 
science, comparative politics, political theory. Oxford, UK: Oxford Handbooks Online. 
Wallach, A.D., M. Bekoff, M.P. Nelson, and D. Ramp 2015. Promoting predators and 
compassionate conservation. Conservation Biology 29: 1481-1484. 
Wallach, A. D., E. G. Ritchie, J. Read, and A.J. O’Neill. 2009. More than mere numbers: the 
impact of lethal control on the social stability of a top-order predator. PloS ONE 
4(9):e6861:1-8. 
Way, J.G.
Text Len: 1193
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
Wallach, A. D., E. G. Ritchie, J. Read, and A.J. O’Neill. 2009. More than mere numbers: the 
impact of lethal control on the social stability of a top-order predator. PloS ONE 
4(9):e6861:1-8. 
Way, J.G. 2007. Movements of transient coyotes (Canis latrans var.) in urbanized eastern 
Massachusetts. Canadian Field-Naturalist 121(4): 364-369. 
Way, J. G. 2010. Double-litters in Coywolf (Canis latrans x lycaon) Packs Following the Death 
or Disappearance of a Resident Territorial Male. Canadian Field Naturalist 124(3): 256-
257. 
Way, J.G. 2011. Eastern Coyote/Coywolf (Canis latrans x lycaon) Movement Patterns: Lessons 
Learned in Urbanized Ecosystems. Cities and the Environment (CATE) 4(1): article 2, 12 
pages. http://digitalcommons.lmu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1044&context=cate. 
Way, J.G., and B.N. White. 2013. Coyotes, red foxes, and the prevalence of Lyme disease. 
Northeastern Naturalist 20(4):655-665.  
Way, J. G., I.M. Ortega, and P.J. Auger. 2002. Eastern coyote home range, territoriality and 
sociality on urbanized Cape Cod, Massachusetts. Northeast Wildlife 57: 1-18. 
Way, J. G., B.C. Timm, and E. G. Strauss. 2009. Coywolf (Canis latrans x lycaon)
Text Len: 1182
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. Ortega, and P.J. Auger. 2002. Eastern coyote home range, territoriality and 
sociality on urbanized Cape Cod, Massachusetts. Northeast Wildlife 57: 1-18. 
Way, J. G., B.C. Timm, and E. G. Strauss. 2009. Coywolf (Canis latrans x lycaon) pack density 
doubles following the death of a resident territorial male. Canadian Field Naturalist 
123(3): 199-205. 
Wielgus, R.B., and K.A. Peebles. 2014. Effects of Wolf Mortality on Livestock Depredations. 
PLoS ONE 9(12): e113505. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0113505. 
 
Text Len: 511
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
