United States Department of Agriculture  
 
United States 
Department of 
Agriculture 
Animal and Plant 
Health Inspection 
Service 
Veterinary Services 
Strategy and Policy 
Center for 
Epidemiology and 
Animal Health 
October 2022 
Infectious Hypodermal and 
Hematopoietic Necrosis Virus 
(IHHNV) in the United States: 
Rapid Risk Assessment 

2 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
 
Background 
History  
Infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis (IHHNV) is a viral disease that has affected wild and 
cultured shrimp and prawn (collectively referred to in this document as “shrimp”) globally for 
approximately 40 years.[1] The virus was first identified following a high mortality disease outbreak in 
farmed Penaeus stylirostris (Pacific blue shrimp) in Hawaii in 1981. Diagnostic examination of P. 
Key Points 
• Infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV) is globally distributed in 
wild and cultured shrimp populations. Some affected countries are not World Organization 
for Animal Health (WOAH) affiliates, which may affect disease reporting. 
• IHHNV is present in wild shrimp populations in the coastal waters of South, Central, and 
North America and in the Caribbean Ocean. 
• Potentially susceptible wild and introduced penaeid shrimp, other crustaceans, bivalves, 
and fish are present in U.S. coastal waters. Susceptibility studies have not been conducted 
for many species. 
• Infected shrimp may appear clinically healthy and remain infected for life. 
• There are no Federal regulations requiring
Text Len: 1558
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 the Caribbean Ocean. 
• Potentially susceptible wild and introduced penaeid shrimp, other crustaceans, bivalves, 
and fish are present in U.S. coastal waters. Susceptibility studies have not been conducted 
for many species. 
• Infected shrimp may appear clinically healthy and remain infected for life. 
• There are no Federal regulations requiring documentation of the health of shrimp prior to 
importation. Some States do require health certification prior to entry. 
• The United States has reported previous detections of IHHNV to WOAH. These detections 
resulted in serious consequences domestically and relative to international trade. If a large-
scale outbreak occurred, it is plausible that significant economic and export trade 
consequences could occur. 
• There is no national surveillance plan for IHHNV. Some States may require testing prior to 
entry. 
• Plausible pathways of entry for IHHNV include: 
o Ballast water and ship fouling  
o Movement of IHHNV in water  
o Importation of live shrimp  
o Importation of commodity shrimp products  
o Importation of bait shrimp  
• Plausible pathways of exposure for wild and farmed shrimp include: 
o Documented domestic exposure pathways  
 Introduction of imported IHHNV-infected shrimp into aquaculture facilities  
 Transfer of IHHNV-infected shrimp between aquaculture facilities 
o Commodity shrimp processing and waste disposition systems  
o Use of commodity shrimp as bait or food for aquatic animals  
o Use of imported bait shrimp for fishing  
o Movement or presence of IHHNV in water  
• Data, surveillance, and resource gaps diminish capability to fully assess the plausibility of 
all identified pathways. 
o
Text Len: 1690
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
o Commodity shrimp processing and waste disposition systems  
o Use of commodity shrimp as bait or food for aquatic animals  
o Use of imported bait shrimp for fishing  
o Movement or presence of IHHNV in water  
• Data, surveillance, and resource gaps diminish capability to fully assess the plausibility of 
all identified pathways. 
o These gaps will affect capability to develop additional risk assessments or risk 
analyses products. 
o Development of a domestic response plan may be affected. 
 
3 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
monodon (black tiger shrimp) and P. vannamei (whiteleg shrimp) from the same aquaculture system 
identified subclinical infection. From January 2019 through January 2020, IHHNV was among the 
diseases with the highest number of immediate notifications submitted to the World Organisation for 
Animal Health (WOAH) worldwide.[2]  
Distribution  
IHHNV has been identified in cultured shrimp populations worldwide including, but not limited to, 
Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Cambodia, China, Columbia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, 
French Polynesia, Guam, Guatemala, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Japan, Madagascar, Malaysia, 
Mexico, Mozambique, New Caledonia, Nicaragua, Papua New Guinea, Panama, Peru, the Philippines, 
Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Tanzania, Thailand, the United States, Venezuela, and 
Vietnam.[1, 3-5] Countries with WOAH s tatus include Australia, Brazil, Cambodia, China, Costa Rica, 
Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Madagascar, Mexico, Nicaragua, 
Papua New Guinea, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Thailand (
Text Len: 1647
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 United States, Venezuela, and 
Vietnam.[1, 3-5] Countries with WOAH s tatus include Australia, Brazil, Cambodia, China, Costa Rica, 
Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Madagascar, Mexico, Nicaragua, 
Papua New Guinea, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Thailand (Table 1).[6, 7] 
Table
 1.  Countries with an WOAH IHHNV status [6] 
Infection has been reported in wild penaeid shrimp populations in Australia, the Indo-Pacific region, 
and in the coastal waters of Mexico, Central America, and South America (Table 2).[3-5] In 1986 
IHHNV was documented in wild shrimp populations in the Gulf of California (GoC), Mexico. From 2004 
to 2005, IHHVN was detected at Bahia Magdalena on the Pacific coast of the Baja Peninsula (e.g., 
California Baja Sur; approximately 389 kilometers/640 miles south of the U.S. border) [5, 8-12]. IHHNV 
4 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
is reported as widely distributed among wild shrimp populations on the Pacific (including El Salvador, 
Guatemala, Nicaragua, and Panama) and Caribbean coasts of Central America (Panama and 
Honduras).[12-16] The virus has also been reported present in wild shrimp populations in coastal 
waters of South America. On the Pacific side of the continent, positive detections have been reported 
along the coasts of Peru and Ecuador. [12, 15, 17 -19]. Affected countries on the Atlantic side include 
Argentina, Brazil, and Columbia.[20, 21] IHHNV has been reported as widely distributed in cultured 
shrimp in the Caribbean.[16
Text Len: 1540
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 of South America. On the Pacific side of the continent, positive detections have been reported 
along the coasts of Peru and Ecuador. [12, 15, 17 -19]. Affected countries on the Atlantic side include 
Argentina, Brazil, and Columbia.[20, 21] IHHNV has been reported as widely distributed in cultured 
shrimp in the Caribbean.[16] Review of the literature did not identify any  publications reporting 
presence of this virus in wild Caribbean shrimp populations. 
Table 2. North, Central and South American countries with reported IHHNV presence in farmed 
and wild shrimp populations [3-5, 8-19 ] 
Prior to 2019, IHHNV had not been reported in U.S. farmed shrimp since 1993.[22] From January 1, 
2019, 
through January 8, 2020, the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom reported IHHNV 
infections in cultured shrimp to WOAH via immediate notifications. The United States reported two 
disease events. The first event in March 2019 was a recurrence of IHHNV infection in farmed P. 
vannamei in New Mexico followed by transfer of infected shrimp to a facility in California.[2, 23] The 
second event, in May 2019, was detected via routine surveillance sampling and was the first reported 
occurrence of IHHNV in Texas and Florida aquaculture facilities.[2, 23] In both events, control measures 
included quarantine of affected facilities and depopulation of affected tanks. In June 2019, Canada 
reported a first occurrence in four of the country’s five premises that culture P. vannamei. These facilities 
became infected via post-larval shrimp imported from a common source.[2, 23] The third disease event, 
involving two sites, was
Text Len: 1641
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
cluded quarantine of affected facilities and depopulation of affected tanks. In June 2019, Canada 
reported a first occurrence in four of the country’s five premises that culture P. vannamei. These facilities 
became infected via post-larval shrimp imported from a common source.[2, 23] The third disease event, 
involving two sites, was reported by the United Kingdom in July 2019. The first site, an experimental 
facility, imported live animals that developed high mortality after import. The second site, an aquaculture 
facility, imported post-larval shrimp designated as specific pathogen free. These shrimp exhibited no 
clinical signs of disease, but the United Kingdom Competent Authority opened a disease investigation 
after it was reported that one of the exporting suppliers had become positive for IHHNV.[2, 23] 
5 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Current Regulations 
IHHNV has been a WOAH listed notifiable pathogen since 1995.[7] 
 
IHHNV is listed as a reportable Foreign Animal Disease (FAD) on the United States National Animal 
Health Reporting System (NAHRS) Reportable Diseases, Infections, and Infestations List and the 
USDA-APHIS National Veterinary Accreditation Program (NVAP) Notifiable Diseases and Conditions 
website [24]. Suspect cases must be reported to State animal health officials. There are no Federal 
regulations requiring documentation of the health of shrimp prior to importation into the United States. 
Imported animals are not quarantined at ports of entry prior to distribution within the United States. 
There is currently no national surveillance plan for IHHNV. Some States require health certification 
prior to entry for imported and domestic crustacean species.  
Management of ballast water discharge
Text Len: 1771
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 documentation of the health of shrimp prior to importation into the United States. 
Imported animals are not quarantined at ports of entry prior to distribution within the United States. 
There is currently no national surveillance plan for IHHNV. Some States require health certification 
prior to entry for imported and domestic crustacean species.  
Management of ballast water discharge via ballast water treatment and exchange (BWTE) is regulated 
federally by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG), and at the 
State level. Ballast water discharges are required to meet International Maritime Organization (IMO) 
ballast water management convention D-2 standards for allowable concentrations of living organisms 
and microorganisms considered “indicators problematic for ballast water.”[25-28] Such microorganisms 
include human enteric pathogens; however, aquatic animal pathogens are not included. The efficacy of 
BWTE is estimated to range from 50 percent to 90 percent and may not treat microorganisms found in 
biofilms or sediments in ballast tanks.[29-31] Data on the efficacy of BWTE on viruses are lacking. 
Published literature suggests that a) testing for viruses may not occur; and b) using BWTE may 
decrease the concentration of viruses present in ballast water below the detection limits of available 
assays currently used to evaluate treatment methods.[29-31] Some vessels are not required to install a 
Ballast Water Treatment System (BWTS), including those that do not discharge ballast water, or 
discharge only to shoreside facilities or to water that presents little threat (e.g., public drinking water). 
Vessels operating in only one Captain of the Port (COPT) Zone are exempted from ballast water 
ex
Text Len: 1771
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 not required to install a 
Ballast Water Treatment System (BWTS), including those that do not discharge ballast water, or 
discharge only to shoreside facilities or to water that presents little threat (e.g., public drinking water). 
Vessels operating in only one Captain of the Port (COPT) Zone are exempted from ballast water 
exchange reporting and recordkeeping requirements.[26, 27, 29, 31] COPT zones are administrative, 
are not established using ecological or biological bases, and may not be appropriate boundaries for 
addressing invasive species. [31]  
Processing plant effluent and wastewater discharges are regulated under the Clean Water Act (CWA) 
and the EPA Seafood Processing Effluent Guidelines and Standards (a.k.a., Canned and Preserved 
Seafood Category; 40 CFR 408).[32-35] Some States require a National Pollutant  Discharge 
Elimination System (NPDES) permit if effluents are discharged into municipal storm sewer systems. 
However, such permitting is not required if effluent is discharged into a municipal sanitary sewer 
system.[34, 36] Processing effluents and wastewater are discharged to public water treatment works, 
municipal storm sewer systems, municipal sanitary sewers, or natural water bodies. Wastewater and 
effluents that enter public water treatment works or municipal sanitary sewer systems are treated prior 
to final discharge into natural water bodies. Wastewater and effluents that enter storm sewer systems 
are not treated prior to discharge into natural water systems. Wastewater disinfection and treatment 
requirements state that treatment must be sufficient to prevent contamination or damage to public 
water works or natural water bodies. However, requirements depend on the size of the processing 
facility (i.e., small processing plants
Text Len: 1796
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 bodies. Wastewater and effluents that enter storm sewer systems 
are not treated prior to discharge into natural water systems. Wastewater disinfection and treatment 
requirements state that treatment must be sufficient to prevent contamination or damage to public 
water works or natural water bodies. However, requirements depend on the size of the processing 
facility (i.e., small processing plants and farms may be exempt from some regulations). Processing 
facilities are required to monitor and sample wastewater discharges and notify the EPA and State 
6 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
regulatory agencies of the results. However, regular monitoring may not occur and violations have 
been reported.[34]  
The U.S. aquaculture industry is regulated by Federal, State, and local laws. Types of permits typically 
issued for aquaculture include siting and discharge permits. Siting permits are governed by Section 
404 of the CWA and control the siting, number, and size of shrimp farms; establish requirements that 
must be met; regulate discharge of dredged or fill material into the nation’s waters; and prevent the 
degradation of national waters and wetlands. The United States Army Corps of Engineers administers 
Section 404 under the overview of the EPA, often cooperatively with State coastal zone management 
programs. [37] The United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) investigates potential fish and 
wildlife impacts. [38]  
The EPA is responsible for enforcing the CWA, which authorizes the NPDES permit program.[33, 36, 
38] States administer the NPDES permit program, which regulates concentrated aquatic animal 
production (CAAP) facilities (e.g., fish farm, hatchery, production, or other facility) that discharge 
pollutants into Federal waters.[34
Text Len: 1799
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The EPA is responsible for enforcing the CWA, which authorizes the NPDES permit program.[33, 36, 
38] States administer the NPDES permit program, which regulates concentrated aquatic animal 
production (CAAP) facilities (e.g., fish farm, hatchery, production, or other facility) that discharge 
pollutants into Federal waters.[34, 36] Permits and requirements are structured for each farm based on 
the characteristics of the water body that the farm is discharging effluent to; farm production; and levels 
of ammonia, dissolved oxygen, and total suspended solids present in the effluents.[38]  
CAAP facilities must a) meet permit requirements for ongoing monitoring metrics; b) keep records on 
animal numbers and weights, quantity of feeds, and frequency of cleaning, inspections, maintenance, 
and repairs; c) report failures or damage to containment systems; d) report use of experimental animal 
drugs and drugs not used according to label requirements; e) minimize discharges of excess feed; f) 
prevent discharge of drugs and pesticides that have been spilled; g) regularly maintain production and 
wastewater treatment systems; g) minimize solid waste discharges (e.g., uneaten feed, settled solids, 
animal carcasses) if they are facilities with flow-through and recirculating discharge systems; h) 
adequately train staff to properly operate and maintain production and wastewater treatment systems 
and to prevent and respond to spills; and i) develop, maintain, and certify a Best Management Practice 
(BMP) plan.[38] A BMP describes how the aquaculture production facilities will meet the set 
requirements and guidelines. Some States may develop or enact State-specific BMPs.[38-40] Aquatic 
animal production facilities producing less than 45,359
Text Len: 1764
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and respond to spills; and i) develop, maintain, and certify a Best Management Practice 
(BMP) plan.[38] A BMP describes how the aquaculture production facilities will meet the set 
requirements and guidelines. Some States may develop or enact State-specific BMPs.[38-40] Aquatic 
animal production facilities producing less than 45,359 kg/100,000 lbs annually are not subject to 
CAAP effluent guidelines but may still be required to have NPDES permits. 
States are mandated under the CWA to designate specific uses of water bodies and assign site-
specific water quality standards.[37, 38] State aquaculture regulations are not standardized; regulations 
may vary by location (e.g., coastal, inland, wetland) and type of operation, and may include oversight of 
aquaculture facility design, control measures to prevent escape of all shrimp life stages at all 
water/effluent discharge points, effluent treatment and discharge, species certification relative to wildlife 
management and disease freedom status, and water use.[38, 41] States may conduct unannounced 
BMP inspections annually or as needed, and variably regulate and monitor biosecurity and disease 
prevention measures to prevent potential release of aquatic pathogens into approximate natural water 
bodies.[38] State coastal management guidelines must follow or may be more restrictive than those 
described in the Coastal Zone Management Act.[42]  
7 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
States variably require written authorization, an import permit, or a certificate of health from the State 
Veterinarian prior to interstate import of shrimp. Health requirements for shrimp prior to international 
import or export also vary by state. Best Management Practice guidelines that summarize federal and 
state regulations relative to shrimp culture, containment, water treatment, health and biose
Text Len: 1878
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
 
States variably require written authorization, an import permit, or a certificate of health from the State 
Veterinarian prior to interstate import of shrimp. Health requirements for shrimp prior to international 
import or export also vary by state. Best Management Practice guidelines that summarize federal and 
state regulations relative to shrimp culture, containment, water treatment, health and biosecurity may 
be available in some States.   
Hazard Identification 
A hazard, as defined by WOAH, is a chemical, physical, or biological agent, or condition of an animal or 
animal product, with potential to cause an adverse health event. [43]  
IHHNV is a linear, single-stranded, non-enveloped DNA parvovirus also known as Penaeus stylirostris 
densovirus (PstDNV).[1] In July 2019, the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) 
proposed classification of IHHNV as decapod penstyldensovirus 1 (Parvoviridae; 
Penstyldensovirus, Hamaparvovirinae) .[1, 44] Genbank contains approximately 50 IHHNV genomes, 
many of which are incomplete.[45] Lack of complete genomic information limits capability to fully 
assess phylogenetic relatedness and virus transmission characteristics of the virus.[46] To date, 
genetic analyses have identified high rates of genetic variation, nucleotide substitutions and clustering 
among identified strains.[46-51] 
Three infectious IHHNV lineages (Types I, II and III) and two non-infectious types (A and B) have been 
described in the literature.[46, 47, 51, 52] Type I and II have a global distribution. Type I IHHNV 
isol
Text Len: 1580
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 nucleotide substitutions and clustering 
among identified strains.[46-51] 
Three infectious IHHNV lineages (Types I, II and III) and two non-infectious types (A and B) have been 
described in the literature.[46, 47, 51, 52] Type I and II have a global distribution. Type I IHHNV 
isolates are known to infect Peneaus monodon and P. vannamei shrimp.[46] Type II isolates have 
been identified in infected P. monodon, P. stylirostris, and P. vannamei.[46, 51] Type II strains 
detected in the United States (Florida and Texas) in 2019 and 2020 were phylogenetically related to a 
Type II strain found in South America (Ecuador).[46] Type III strains infect (enters, survives and 
multiplies in the host) and become integrated into the genome of P. monodon, but are not infectious 
(transmitted to other hosts).[46] Non-infectious Type A and B IHHNV are inherited, noninfectious, 
endogenous viral elements (EVE) present in the genomes of P. monodon and P. vannamei. These 
EVE sequences contain incomplete IHHNV genome sequences and are randomly inserted into the 
chromosomal DNA of affected shrimp.[7, 46, 50, 51, 53] Shrimp may carry one or both types.[47, 53] 
EVE sequences are present in the germline, and are passed from adults to offspring. 
The function of EVE sequences is not fully understood. It is hypothesized that EVE sequences evolved 
in response to chronic or persistent IHHNV infection.[48, 50, 51] Some authors state that EVE 
sequences appear to lower susceptibility to IHHNV infection via viral accommodation and 
Text Len: 1534
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

EVE sequences are present in the germline, and are passed from adults to offspring. 
The function of EVE sequences is not fully understood. It is hypothesized that EVE sequences evolved 
in response to chronic or persistent IHHNV infection.[48, 50, 51] Some authors state that EVE 
sequences appear to lower susceptibility to IHHNV infection via viral accommodation and 
tolerance.[51, 54] Other authors suggest that some EVE sequences may not be fully protective, and 
that co-presence of EVE sequences and IHHNV virus in shrimp could result in recombination events 
leading to return to virulence or evolution of new IHHNV strains.[51, 54]  
Viral accommodation is described as a naturally occurring autonomous genetic modification process. It 
is hypothesized to be an evolutionary strategy for heritable immunity via the EVE sequences present in 
adult shrimp and passed on in germ cells.[50] The resultant immunity is thought to occur by interfering 
with infectious IHHNV virus replication. Affected shrimp persistently harbor the IHHNV virus but do not 
8 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
develop clinical signs of disease.[51] Experimental studies have demonstrated that presence of EVE 
sequences results in significant reduction of IHHNV viral replication. Shrimp maintained viral loads of 
varying intensity but remained free of clinical signs.[50] It should be noted that these studies did not 
meet WOAH criteria for natural infection.[55]  
Tolerance (resistance), which is described as a diminished response to IHHNV infection, has been 
described in some shrimp species. For example, a genetic line of P. stylirostris (“Super Shrimp”) 
developed in the 1990s was reported to be IHHNV resistant at the conclusion of a 32-day experimental 
chall
Text Len: 1777
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
Tolerance (resistance), which is described as a diminished response to IHHNV infection, has been 
described in some shrimp species. For example, a genetic line of P. stylirostris (“Super Shrimp”) 
developed in the 1990s was reported to be IHHNV resistant at the conclusion of a 32-day experimental 
challenge study, and P. vannamei farmed in Latin America and Asia are reportedly tolerant to 
IHHNV.[7, 46] Farmed IHHNV tolerant shrimp are described as exhibiting no clinical signs of disease 
despite detectable presence of virulent IHHNV in individual animals.[7, 46] In field studies in IHHNV-
endemic regions of Ecuador, in-pond prevalence rates of IHHNV in apparently healthy IHHNV tolerant 
P. monodon, P. stylirostris and P. vannamei ranged from 3.3 to 100 percent.[7] Shrimp exhibited no 
clinical signs of disease despite viral load (virus copies/ng DNA) ranging from low (zero) to high (2.9 x 
105) in individual animals.[7] Some published literature state that viral load does not affect individual 
shrimp weight or other production parameters. Other reports state that histological evidence of infection 
and decreased body weight can occur when viral loads are high.[7, 56] In several experimental 
challenge studies, IHHNV tolerant/resistant specific pathogen free (SPF) P. monodon, P. stylirostris 
and P. vannamei had high detectable viral loads post-challenge, but did not exhibit clinical signs of 
disease. Species differences in viral load (P. vannamei > P. monodon > P. stylirostris) were noted in 
one study.[
Text Len: 1534
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 (SPF) P. monodon, P. stylirostris 
and P. vannamei had high detectable viral loads post-challenge, but did not exhibit clinical signs of 
disease. Species differences in viral load (P. vannamei > P. monodon > P. stylirostris) were noted in 
one study.[46] Mortality rates were low (< 3 percent) among challenged treatment groups. The 
challenge method used in these studies did not meet WOAH criteria for natural exposure.[55]   
Many aspects related to the epidemiology of IHHNV are still unclear due to lack of research on the 
pathogenicity, genetics and other factors associated with the virus.[50] Recently published research 
suggests that prevalence and virus detection rates, and presence of clinical signs, morbidity, and 
mortality rates are highly variable and may be influenced by shrimp species, age, genetics and health 
status; virus genetics; the presence of EVE sequences; virus genetics; laboratory diagnostic testing 
modalities; farm husbandry and biosecurity practices; and unknown factors.[7]  
Transmission 
Horizontal transmission appears to occur via direct contact with contaminated water and infected 
shrimp, and orally via ingestion of infected shrimp tissues and organic matter. Shrimp tissues 
containing homologous EVE sequences do not appear to be infectious to P. vannamei and P. 
monodon. Vertical transmission occurs in infected females, leading to production of eggs with poor 
hatchability, leading to poor development and survival of larvae and post-larvae. While data are limited 
on stability of the virus outside of the host in natural environments, reports of transmission via organic 
matter and contaminated water support the plausibility of environmental persistence. Vector 
transmission is unknown. 
Clinical
Text Len: 1757
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 infected females, leading to production of eggs with poor 
hatchability, leading to poor development and survival of larvae and post-larvae. While data are limited 
on stability of the virus outside of the host in natural environments, reports of transmission via organic 
matter and contaminated water support the plausibility of environmental persistence. Vector 
transmission is unknown. 
Clinical Signs and Pathogenicity 
IHHNV infection manifests as acute or chronic disease. Response to infection is variable and is 
affected by multiple host characteristics (e.g., age, body size, gender, genetics, nutritional status, 
species) and external conditions (e.g., environment, population density, stress). Chronically infected 
animals retain viable virus in tissues for life.   
9 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Acute disease is typically seen in P. stylirostris, although there are published reports of acute disease 
occurrence in Machrobrachium rosenbergii as well.[50, 57] Clinical signs are most often observed in 
post-larvae and juvenile shrimp and include noticeable decrease in food consumption; lethargic 
swimming or motionlessness at the water surface followed by rolling over and sinking; motionlessness 
at the bottom of the tank/pond prior to mortality; pale musculature; bluish color; and white to buff-
colored mottling on the cuticular epidermis, especially at the junction of the tergal plates. Mortality rates 
may be greatest (up to 90 percent) in small shrimp (5.0 mg – 3.7 gm body weight). Chronic infection 
commonly occurs in P. vannamei and P. monodon but has been reported in P. stylirostris and M. 
rosenbergii.[50, 57] Clinical signs include
Text Len: 1694
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
gal plates. Mortality rates 
may be greatest (up to 90 percent) in small shrimp (5.0 mg – 3.7 gm body weight). Chronic infection 
commonly occurs in P. vannamei and P. monodon but has been reported in P. stylirostris and M. 
rosenbergii.[50, 57] Clinical signs include deformed rostrum (bent 45o to 90o left or right); sixth 
abdominal segment deformity; wrinkled antennae; cuticular roughness; “bubble head” appearance; 
runting; and disparate growth rates (Runt Deformity Syndrome; RDS). Cuticular deformities are 
considered pathognomonic when present in some shrimp species.  
Disease in P . stylirostris: Clinical disease is affected by the transmission pathway and the age, body 
weight, and size of affected shrimp. Vertically infected larvae and post-larvae often appear healthy until 
approximately 35 days of age when clinical signs appear, followed approximately 14 days later by high 
mortality (50 percent to 90 percent). Clinical disease in horizontally infected shrimp is age and body 
size dependent. Acute disease with clinical signs and high mortality occurs in juvenile and sub-adult 
shrimp, while adult shrimp and individuals of greater body weight exhibit less severe disease. Shrimp 
surviving disease remain infected and are transmission capable. RDS has also been documented. 
Disease in P . vannamei: This species shows relative resistance to IHHNV infection; however, 
asymptomatic infection has been detected in all life stages including eggs.[7] Vertical transmission 
results in reduced egg production, reduced egg hatchability, and high prevalence of infection in 
nauplii (first larval stage). Juvenile shrimp develop RDS
Text Len: 1653
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ase in P . vannamei: This species shows relative resistance to IHHNV infection; however, 
asymptomatic infection has been detected in all life stages including eggs.[7] Vertical transmission 
results in reduced egg production, reduced egg hatchability, and high prevalence of infection in 
nauplii (first larval stage). Juvenile shrimp develop RDS. Horizontally infected juvenile shrimp may 
develop RDS, while adult shrimp rarely demonstrate clinical signs. Juvenile shrimp surviving to 
adulthood and infected adults remain infected for life. P. vannamei containing EVE sequences have 
been reported, and do not appear capable of producing infectious virions or of horizontal IHHNV 
transmission to susceptible hosts.[7] 
Disease in P. monodon: IHHNV infection rarely causes disease in P. monodon; however, RDS has 
been reported.[46, 56] Shrimp remain infected for life. Sellars et al., 2019 reported reduced 
performance (growth, general health, and survival) in asymptomatically infected P. monodon in farm 
ponds and experimentally simulated farm environments when high viral loads were present in affected 
animals.[56] P. monodon containing integrated IHHNV EVE sequences have been reported. Such 
shrimp do not appear capable of producing infectious IHHNV virions or of horizontal IHHNV 
transmission to susceptible hosts.[7]  
Asymptomatic carriers of IHHNV: Asymptomatic IHHNV has been reported in M. rosenbergii, P. 
monodon and P. vannamei.[1] Mechanisms by which these species function as asymptomatic carriers 
may include presence of EVE sequences, accommodation and tolerance as described above. 
Asymptomatic carriers exhibit no clinical signs but
Text Len: 1665
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 of IHHNV: Asymptomatic IHHNV has been reported in M. rosenbergii, P. 
monodon and P. vannamei.[1] Mechanisms by which these species function as asymptomatic carriers 
may include presence of EVE sequences, accommodation and tolerance as described above. 
Asymptomatic carriers exhibit no clinical signs but may be capable of transmitting virus to susceptible 
shrimp.[50] A negative trend between IHHNV viral load present in ponds containing asymptomatic 
shrimp and performance (growth, general health, and survival) has been reported in the literature.[7, 
46, 56] 
10 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Affected Species 
Table 3 summarizes the shrimp species meeting WOAH criteria for listing as susceptible to IHHNV 
(e.g., P. californiensis, P. monodon, P. setiferus, P. stylirostris, P. vannamei) and other crustacean, bi-
valve, and fish species in which IHHNV presence has been detected or infection experimentally 
induced. The epidemiological significance of detection and/or experimental infection in non-shrimp 
species has not yet been determined. 
 
Table 3. Aquatic animal species meeting WOAH criteria for listing as susceptible to IHHNV, or 
with reported, confirmed, or suspected IHHNV detection based on review of the literature.[1, 14, 
16, 20, 57-66] 
Group Genus species Common name 
Shrimp/Crayfish Artemesia longinaris c Argentine stiletto shrimp 
 Farfantepenaeus duorarum  Northern pink shrimp 
 Palaemon macrodactylus  Oriental shrimp 

Text Len: 1479
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 on review of the literature.[1, 14, 
16, 20, 57-66] 
Group Genus species Common name 
Shrimp/Crayfish Artemesia longinaris c Argentine stiletto shrimp 
 Farfantepenaeus duorarum  Northern pink shrimp 
 Palaemon macrodactylus  Oriental shrimp 
 Macrobrachium rosenbergii c Giant river prawn 
 Penaeus aztecus b Northern brown shrimp 
 Penaeus californiensis a Yellowleg shrimp 
 Penaeus chinensis (P. orientalis) Chinese fleshy prawn 
 Penaeus duorarum c Northern pink shrimp 
 Penaeus indicus  Indian prawn 
 Penaeus japonicus c Kuruma prawn; Japanese tiger prawn 
 Penaeus latisulcatus  Western king prawn 
 Penaeus merguiensis Banana shrimp 
 Penaeus monodon a Black tiger prawn  
 Penaeus monodon x Penaeus 
esculentus hybrid Tiger prawn hybrid 
 Penaeus occidentalis c Western white shrimp 
 Penaeus schmitti  Southern white shrimp 
 Penaeus semisulcatus  c Green tiger prawn 
 Penaeus setiferus a Atlantic white shrimp  
 Penaeus stylirostrisa Western blue shrimp  
 Penaeus subtilis  
(Farfantepenaeus subtilis)  Brown shrimp 
 Penaeus vannamei a Whiteleg shrimp  
 Procambarus clarkii  Louisiana red crayfish 
Crab Callinectes arcuatus c Arched swimming crab 
 Chionoecetes angulatus  Triangle tanner crab 
 Hemigraspus penicillatus c Hairy-clawed shore crab 
 Neohelice granulate
Text Len: 1288
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 vannamei a Whiteleg shrimp  
 Procambarus clarkii  Louisiana red crayfish 
Crab Callinectes arcuatus c Arched swimming crab 
 Chionoecetes angulatus  Triangle tanner crab 
 Hemigraspus penicillatus c Hairy-clawed shore crab 
 Neohelice granulate  Tropical crab 
Bi-valve shellfish Mactra chinesis Chinese trough clam, Sunray surf 
clam 
 Mactra veneriformis Intertidal clam 
11 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Group Genus species Common name 
 Meretrix meretrix Asiatic hard clam 
 Mytilus edulis Atlantic blue mussel 
 Ruditapes philippinarum  Manila clam, Japanese littleneck clam 
 Sinonvacula constricta Chinese razor clam 
 Tegillarca granosa Ark clam, blood cockle, blood clam 
Fish Achirus mazatlanus c Mazatlan sole 
 Gerres cinereus c Yellowfin mojarra 
 Oreochromis spp. c Tilapia spp. 
 Lile stolifera c Pacific piquitinga 
 Centropomus medius c Blackfin snook 
aFulfills the criteria for listing as susceptible to infection according to the WOAH Aquatic Animal Health 
Code, Chapter 1.5    
bSpecies for which there is incomplete evidence to fulfill the criteria for listing as susceptible  
cSpecies for which there is no evidence for infection, but have had positive PCR results 
 
Farmed shrimp reared in the United States that are susceptible to IHHNV include P. vannamei, P. 
monodon, and P.
Text Len: 1327
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   
bSpecies for which there is incomplete evidence to fulfill the criteria for listing as susceptible  
cSpecies for which there is no evidence for infection, but have had positive PCR results 
 
Farmed shrimp reared in the United States that are susceptible to IHHNV include P. vannamei, P. 
monodon, and P. stylirostris.[38] Potentially susceptible indigenous wild and introduced penaeid shrimp 
populations and other indigenous and wild crustaceans, bi-valves, and fish species are found along the 
Atlantic, Gulf, and Pacific coasts of the continental United States, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and U.S. Virgin 
Islands (Table 4).  
 
Table 4. Indigenous and introduced aquatic animals that are susceptible or potentially 
susceptible to IHHNV infection, based on literature review.[67-88] 
Genus species Common name Location Indigenous/Introduced 
Farfantepenaeus 
duorarum  Northern pink shrimp East Coast: Maryland to Florida; 
Gulf of Mexico: Florida to Texas Indigenous 
Macrobrachium 
rosenbergii  Giant river prawn 
Gulf of Mexico:  possible 
established population in 
Mississippi 
Introduced 
Palaemon 
macrodactylus  Oriental shrimp 
East Coast: Northwest Atlantic 
Ocean; West Coast: Oregon to 
California   
Introduced 
Penaeus aztecus Northern brown shrimp 
East Coast:  Massachusetts to 
Florida; Gulf of Mexico: Florida 
to Texas 
Indigenous 
Penaeus californiensis  
Yellowleg shrimp 
(Farfantepenaeus 
californiensis) 
West Coast: San Francisco 
Bay, California
Text Len: 1476
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Introduced 
Penaeus aztecus Northern brown shrimp 
East Coast:  Massachusetts to 
Florida; Gulf of Mexico: Florida 
to Texas 
Indigenous 
Penaeus californiensis  
Yellowleg shrimp 
(Farfantepenaeus 
californiensis) 
West Coast: San Francisco 
Bay, California to Chile Indigenous 
Penaeus duorarum  
Northern pink shrimp 
(Farfantepenaeus 
duorarum) 
East Coast: Chesapeake Bay, 
Maryland to the Florida Keys; 
Gulf of Mexico: Florida to Texas 
Indigenous 
12 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Genus species Common name Location Indigenous/Introduced 
Penaeus monodon Black tiger prawn  
East Coast: North Carolina to 
Florida; Gulf of Mexico: Florida 
to Texas 
Introduced 
Penaeus schmitti  
Western Atlantic Ocean: 
Greater Antilles, Cuba, Virgin 
Islands 
Indigenous 
Penaeus setiferus Atlantic white shrimp  
East Coast: New York to 
Florida; Gulf of Mexico: present 
throughout  
Indigenous 
Penaeus vannamei Pacific whiteleg shrimp 
Accidental aquaculture releases 
in Hawaii, Texas, South 
Carolina Puerto Rico; no 
evidence of established 
populations 
Introduced 
Procambarus clarkii Louisiana red crayfish 
Gulf coastal plain from the 
Florida panhandle to Mexico; 
southern Mississippi River 
drainage to Illinois  
Indigenous 
Callinectes arcuatus Arched swimming crab 
West Coast: Los Angeles, 
California to Peru and northern 

Text Len: 1357
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Introduced 
Procambarus clarkii Louisiana red crayfish 
Gulf coastal plain from the 
Florida panhandle to Mexico; 
southern Mississippi River 
drainage to Illinois  
Indigenous 
Callinectes arcuatus Arched swimming crab 
West Coast: Los Angeles, 
California to Peru and northern 
Chile 
Indigenous 
Chionoecetes 
angulatus  Triangle tanner crab 
West Coast: Aleutian Islands, 
Bering Sea, British Columbia to 
the continental slope of 
California 
Indigenous 
Mytilus edulis  Atlantic blue mussel East Coast: Canada to North 
Carolina; West Coast: California Indigenous, Introduced 
Ruditapes 
philippinarum  
Manila clam, Japanese 
littleneck clam 
West Coast: British Columbia to 
California; Hawaii Introduced 
Gerres cinereus  Yellowfin mojarra Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean 
Ocean Indigenous 
Oreochromis spp. Tilapia spp. 
East Coast: North Carolina to 
Florida; Gulf of Mexico: Florida, 
Alabama, Texas; Puerto Rico 
Introduced 
 
Diagnostic Testing 
IHHNV has affinity for tissues of ectodermal and mesodermal origin (gills, cuticular epithelium, 
hypodermis, connective tissues, hematopoietic tissues, lymphoid organs, antennal glands, and neural 
tissues) and may have affinity for the hepatopancreas of M. rosenbergii. Tissues suitable for diagnostic 
testing include pooled small life stage shrimp (post-larvae or animals < 0.5 gm), individual large shrimp, 
or target
Text Len: 1380
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, hematopoietic tissues, lymphoid organs, antennal glands, and neural 
tissues) and may have affinity for the hepatopancreas of M. rosenbergii. Tissues suitable for diagnostic 
testing include pooled small life stage shrimp (post-larvae or animals < 0.5 gm), individual large shrimp, 
or target tissues harvested from large shrimp (e.g., connective tissue, gills, hematopoietic nodules, 
hemocytes, ventral nerve cord and ganglia, antennal gland tubule epithelial cells, lymphoid organ 
13 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
parenchymal cells, hemolymph). Tissues that may be submitted for non-lethal surveillance testing 
include hemolymph and pleopods. Spawned eggs and larval shrimp are not suitable for disease testing 
or IHHNV disease freedom certification because viral loads may be below detection limits.[89]  
Recommendations regarding diagnostic test suitability for surveillance and diagnosis are described in 
the WOAH Manual of Diagnostic Tests for Aquatic Animals.[89]  Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is 
recommended for diagnosis of acute and chronic infections. Conventional PCR and TaqMan rtPCR 
assays can be used to detect and differentiate IHHVN virus from EVE sequences. Unexpected PCR 
results (positive or negative) should be confirmed with a different PCR primer set or another diagnostic 
test (e.g., genetic sequencing, histopathology, in situ hybridization assay of histological sections, 
molecular diagnostics, recombinase polymerase amplification assay, trans-electron microscopy). The 
WOAH Manual of Diagnostic Tests states that geographical IHHNV variants may not be detectable by 
all
Text Len: 1635
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 PCR primer set or another diagnostic 
test (e.g., genetic sequencing, histopathology, in situ hybridization assay of histological sections, 
molecular diagnostics, recombinase polymerase amplification assay, trans-electron microscopy). The 
WOAH Manual of Diagnostic Tests states that geographical IHHNV variants may not be detectable by 
all diagnostic modalities.[6] Attempts to culture IHHNV in vitro have not been successful. There are no 
serological assays. 
Histology is often used to detect IHHNV-specific Cowdry inclusion bodies, which are considered 
pathognomonic (indicative of a specific disease or condition) for IHHNV infection. Experimentally, 
histopathologic changes may be more prevalent in tissues collected from larger shrimp. Caro et al., 
2022 demonstrated that while Cowdry bodies were detectable in experimentally challenged P. 
monodon and P. vannamei, they were not reliably present in similarly challenged P. stylirostris.[7] The 
authors also noted that the presence of Cowdry bodies appeared to be influenced by the level of viral 
load in infected individuals (less likely to be present with low viral loads).[7]  
Molecular assays and genome sequencing should be used to confirm virulent IHHNV 
presence/absence and rule-out presence of known or novel EVE sequences  in P. monodon and P. 
vannamei.[46, 51, 53] According to the literature, presence of EVE sequences in the genome of some 
shrimp species may present challenges to molecular assays used for IHHNV surveillance and 
diagnostic testing. If diagnostic assays designed to detect virulent IHHNV genomic material also detect 
EVE sequences, non-IHHNV infected shrimp with EVE sequences in
Text Len: 1680
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
i.[46, 51, 53] According to the literature, presence of EVE sequences in the genome of some 
shrimp species may present challenges to molecular assays used for IHHNV surveillance and 
diagnostic testing. If diagnostic assays designed to detect virulent IHHNV genomic material also detect 
EVE sequences, non-IHHNV infected shrimp with EVE sequences in their genomes will test positive 
(false-positives).[51]  At present, some diagnostic assays recommended by WOAH for detection of 
infectious IHHNV may also detect EVE sequences present shrimp.[6, 51]  
Molecular assays designed to detect known EVE sequences are available. If these assays are used 
and no additional testing performed to detect virulent IHHNV genomic material, shrimp with EVE 
sequences may be identified as falsely positive for infectious IHHNV virus.[51] It is also plausible that 
assays designed to detect known EVE sequences could return false-negative results if shrimp have 
EVE sequences containing inverted, missing, reordered, repeated, or unique IHHNV genome 
fragments.[48, 53, 54, 58, 90] It may be advantageous for laboratories to utilize molecular assays 
capable of detecting both viral IHHNV and EVE sequence DNA. Other assays that could present 
options for distinguishing between infectious IHHNV and EVE sequences include clustered interspaced 
short palindromic repeats (CRISPER), digital droplet PCR, next-generation sequencing assays, protein 
modeling, and real-time PCR (rtPCR) employing fluorescent probes or SYBER Green dye amplicon 
detection methods.[46, 51, 53] This has been previously achieved using a series of seven overlapping 
primer sets to verify the presence of the whole IHHNV genome.[48] Taengcha
Text Len: 1708
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 PCR, next-generation sequencing assays, protein 
modeling, and real-time PCR (rtPCR) employing fluorescent probes or SYBER Green dye amplicon 
detection methods.[46, 51, 53] This has been previously achieved using a series of seven overlapping 
primer sets to verify the presence of the whole IHHNV genome.[48] Taengchaivaphum et al., 2022 
reported that using a “long-amp” PCR method covering 90 percent of the IHHNV genome 
14 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
(approximately 4000 base pairs) was effective in confirming the absence of IHHNV in a sample that 
had returned a positive PCR test result with the WOAH recommended testing method.[51] 
Treatment 
There is no treatment or vaccine available for IHHNV. Use of RNA interference gene silencing has 
been used experimentally; however, a delivery technology suitable for aquaculture use is not available. 
Eggs and larvae may be disinfected to reduce IHHNV contamination; however, this does not prevent 
vertical transmission.   
Disease Prevention and Control Measures  
Appropriate biosecurity practices and husbandry to prevent IHHNV introduction and spread should 
include a) international and domestic procurement of live shrimp and germplasm from IHHNV-free 
sources; b) quarantine of all new shrimp stocks upon arrival; c) appropriate disinfection and disposal of 
transport water; d) health and mortality monitoring of shrimp present on site; e) pre- and post-treatment 
of farm water sources; f) minimizing or eliminating water exchanges between populations; and g) 
appropriate sanitization of equipment and tanks.[2] The virus is temperature stable (-20 oC/-4 oF x 5 
Text Len: 1652
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 disinfection and disposal of 
transport water; d) health and mortality monitoring of shrimp present on site; e) pre- and post-treatment 
of farm water sources; f) minimizing or eliminating water exchanges between populations; and g) 
appropriate sanitization of equipment and tanks.[2] The virus is temperature stable (-20 oC/-4 oF x 5 
years) and will survive freeze/thaw cycles in shrimp tissues, clarified suspensions, and 50 percent 
glycerin. In experimentally infected live P. vannamei, increased viral titers (log102) were noted at lower 
temperatures (24 oC/75.2 oF, compared to 32 oC/ 89.6 oF).[6] 
Public Health 
IHHNV is not a zoonotic disease.   
Potential Entry Pathways  
The WOAH defines an entry pathway as any pathway that allows movement of a hazard from a point of 
origin (e.g., foreign country) to domestic points of entry.[43]  
Pathway 1:  Ballast water, ship fouling 
Ballast water and fouling present on the hulls of ships contain a variety of biological materials including 
animals (e.g., crustaceans, echinoderms, fish, mollusks, plankton), microorganisms (e.g., bacteria, 
viruses), and plants. Crustacean species can compose up to 50 percent of taxa fouling commercial and 
recreational ships and boats in fresh and marine water. Both ballast water and ship fouling have been 
associated with invasive aquatic animal and pathogen introductions in coastal and freshwater systems 
globally and in the United States.[29-31, 91, 92]  
 
Ballast water is to
Text Len: 1483
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 to 50 percent of taxa fouling commercial and 
recreational ships and boats in fresh and marine water. Both ballast water and ship fouling have been 
associated with invasive aquatic animal and pathogen introductions in coastal and freshwater systems 
globally and in the United States.[29-31, 91, 92]  
 
Ballast water is to be treated and exchanged in accordance with International, Federal, and State 
regulations and standards; however, BWTE reduces with variable efficacy, but does not eliminate, 
living organisms and microorganisms, and the efficacy of BWTE on viruses is generally unknown. 
Some ships are exempt from BWTE and recordkeeping requirements, or are allowed to discharge 
ballast water in COPT zones. COPT zones are administrative and do not consider ecological or 
biological factors that may permit movement of invasive microorganisms, organisms or plants out of the 
zone.  Regulatory non-compliance does occur, and has been reported.[93]  
Current regulations and standards do not list conditions for ballast water treatment, monitoring, or 
testing for aquatic pathogens, including IHHNV. A literature review did not identify surveillance data or 
15 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
studies monitoring ballast water or ship hull fouling for IHHNV presence/absence. The literature did not 
identify any reports definitively linking ballast water or ship fouling to introduction of IHHNV at a port of 
entry, coastal waterway, or aquaculture facility. This lack of data or reporting does not preclude the 
potential for ballast water or ship fouling to function as transboundary pathways of IHHNV introduction. 
Given the above information and previous documentation of invasive species and pathogen 
introductions, ballast water and ship fouling appear to be plausible trans
Text Len: 1816
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

entry, coastal waterway, or aquaculture facility. This lack of data or reporting does not preclude the 
potential for ballast water or ship fouling to function as transboundary pathways of IHHNV introduction. 
Given the above information and previous documentation of invasive species and pathogen 
introductions, ballast water and ship fouling appear to be plausible transboundary pathways of entry for 
IHHNV.  
 
Pathway 2:  Movement of infected shrimp, eggs, or IHHNV in water 
A comprehensive evaluation of IHHNV dispersal and movement in ocean currents is beyond the scope 
of this document. Briefly, movement of aquatic pathogens in ocean currents has been demonstrated 
and epidemiologically linked to disease introductions and outbreaks [94-96], and dispersals of invasive 
aquatic organisms and microorganisms from shipping ports (after introduction via Pathway 1) have 
been documented via ocean tides and currents.[94, 97] Oceanographic current systems in the GoC are 
considered factors affecting IHHVN distribution and prevalence among resident wild shrimp 
populations. Prevalence is highest in the northern zone, which is a semi-isolated oceanographic cell 
affected by a gyre (rotary pattern) that limits, but does not prevent, water-borne out-migration of 
infected shrimp and IHHNV.[10, 98] Lower prevalence rates in the central and southern zones appear 
related to ocean currents that reduce contact rates between infected shrimp and the concentration of 
IHHNV in the water column, allow water exchanges between the zones and the open ocean, and may 
have provided transmission routes to wild shrimp located along the west coast of the Baja California 
Sur (specifically Bahia Magdalena) and the south coast of Mexico.[9, 12, 99]  
Text Len: 1754
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 that reduce contact rates between infected shrimp and the concentration of 
IHHNV in the water column, allow water exchanges between the zones and the open ocean, and may 
have provided transmission routes to wild shrimp located along the west coast of the Baja California 
Sur (specifically Bahia Magdalena) and the south coast of Mexico.[9, 12, 99]   
It appears highly plausible that ocean currents may provide a transboundary pathway of entry for 
IHHNV or IHHNV infected shrimp or eggs into coastal waters along the continental United States, given 
a) documented evidence of aquatic pathogen introductions occurring via movement in water and ocean 
currents; and b) published literature linking the spread of IHHNV infection in wild shrimp populations in 
South, Central, and North America to movement of IHHNV virus or infected shrimp in ocean currents 
and/or water exchanges (Figures 1 - 4).   
16 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Literature reported locations of IHHNV-infected wild shrimp populations in North, Central, and 
South American coastal waters. [4, 5, 8-19, 62, 89, 100].  USDA figure. 
 
 

17 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Brief schematic overview of global ocean currents. All ocean currents, seasonal upwellings, and 
gyres are not represented. [100-109] 
 
 
Figure 3.  Brief schematic overview of ocean currents on the Pacific coast of the Baja Peninsula. All 
ocean currents, seasonal upwellings, and gyres are not represented.[100, 101, 103, 107] USDA figure. 
 

18 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 

Text Len: 1609
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 [100-109] 
 
 
Figure 3.  Brief schematic overview of ocean currents on the Pacific coast of the Baja Peninsula. All 
ocean currents, seasonal upwellings, and gyres are not represented.[100, 101, 103, 107] USDA figure. 
 

18 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Brief schematic overview of ocean currents in the Gulf of Mexico. All ocean currents, seasonal 
upwellings, and gyres are not represented.[100, 101, 105, 106, 108-111] 
 
Pathway 3:  Nauplii, post-larvae, or broodstock imported for aquaculture purposes  
The literature identifies imported nauplii and juvenile and broodstock shrimp as potential and known 
sources of pathogen introduction in shrimp aquaculture.[2, 112] Non-native shrimp from foreign 
hatcheries are imported to the United States for aquaculture purposes, which may result in 
transboundary introduction of IHHNV.[113]  As examples, introductions of IHHNV into domestic shrimp 
aquaculture facilities were associated with importation of live shrimp from IHHNV-affected countries in 
2013, 2018, and 2019.[2, 23]  In general, there are no import regulations or requirements for 
Certificates of Veterinary Inspection to certify that imported live shrimp are healthy or disease-free, and 
there is a lack of capability to quarantine live shrimp prior to import release. It is highly plausible that 
live shrimp imported for aquaculture purposes will serve as transboundary pathways of IHHNV 
introduction, given the above and a) the pathogenesis and epidemiology of IHHNV
Text Len: 1547
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Veterinary Inspection to certify that imported live shrimp are healthy or disease-free, and 
there is a lack of capability to quarantine live shrimp prior to import release. It is highly plausible that 
live shrimp imported for aquaculture purposes will serve as transboundary pathways of IHHNV 
introduction, given the above and a) the pathogenesis and epidemiology of IHHNV in some shrimp 
species; b) the rapid transportation time associated with air freight; c) lack of data reporting the 
sources, volumes, and final disposition pathways of shrimp imported for aquaculture; d) lack of a 
national standardized domestic surveillance program for IHHNV; and e) lack of standardized 
biosecurity and disease surveillance measures among domestic shrimp aquaculture facilities.  
 
Pathway 4:  Imported shrimp for human consumption  
IHHNV is viable in chilled and frozen-thawed shrimp tissues. Since the 1990s, the literature has 
reported presence of IHHNV and other pathogenic shrimp viruses including Taura syndrome virus 
(TSV), white spot syndrome virus (WSSV), and yellowhead virus (YHV) in imported frozen commodity 
shrimp.[112, 114, 115]  
The United States imports shrimp seafood commodities from countries that a) are WOAH -listed; b) 
have reported an IHHNV outbreak to WOAH in the last 2 years; and c) have literature-reported 
presence in cultured or wild shrimp populations (Table 5). It is possible the United States may import 
seafood commodities from non- WOAH member countries where IHHNV is present, but surveillance 
and reporting are lacking.  

19 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
Table 5. Edible shrimp products1 exported to the United States by countries that are a)
Text Len: 1706
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 cultured or wild shrimp populations (Table 5). It is possible the United States may import 
seafood commodities from non- WOAH member countries where IHHNV is present, but surveillance 
and reporting are lacking.  

19 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
Table 5. Edible shrimp products1 exported to the United States by countries that are a) WOAH listed; b) 
reported to have IHHNV in aquaculture; c) reported to have IHHNV in wild shrimp populations; or d) have 
reported an outbreak to WOAH from 2019 to 2021.[2, 3, 62, 66, 115-117] 
aWOAH listed 
bLiterature reported presence in cultured aquaculture 
cLiterature reported presence in wild shrimp populations in the Americas 
dWOAH reported outbreak in the last 2 years 
1 Edible shrimp product includes fresh or chilled peeled, frozen peeled, frozen not peeled, frozen headless shell-on, not frozen 
shell-on, and live fresh or chilled shell-on) 
20 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Only healthy-appearing shrimp are to be processed for human consumption and imported products must 
be prepared in processing facilities regulated and inspected by the country of origin’s government and 
meet USDA and Food and Drug Administration processing requirements. However, IHHNV-infected 
shrimp can appear healthy, and some IHHNV outbreak control measures may include harvest of infected 
shrimp for human commodity pathways.[2, 115, 118] Inspection rates by U.S. regulatory agencies or 
contracted third-party inspectors are typically low at foreign processing facilities compared to the number 
of facilities that produce seafood. In addition, country-of-origin government oversight may be unknown to 
U.S. regulatory
Text Len: 1694
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 control measures may include harvest of infected 
shrimp for human commodity pathways.[2, 115, 118] Inspection rates by U.S. regulatory agencies or 
contracted third-party inspectors are typically low at foreign processing facilities compared to the number 
of facilities that produce seafood. In addition, country-of-origin government oversight may be unknown to 
U.S. regulatory agencies. Currently, there are no U.S. Federal regulations requiring imported frozen 
shrimp destined for human consumption to be screened for aquatic pathogens.[114]  Entry of IHHNV 
into the United States via this pathway has not been documented; however, given this information, it 
seems highly plausible that imported shrimp seafood commodities may pose a transboundary pathway 
of entry for IHHNV. 
 
Pathway 5: Imported bait shrimp   
The United States imports bait shrimp for use in inland freshwater and marine sport fishing.[114] A 
simple internet search shows that imported bait shrimp may be purchased online and in bait shops 
throughout the United States.  
The literature has identified imported bait shrimp as a potential source of aquatic pathogen introduction 
[112, 114], and studies by Prior et al. (2001) and Hasson et al. (2006) demonstrated the presence of 
this pathway in the United States via identification of TSV and WSSV in imported frozen bait shrimp 
purchased at bait and grocery stores.[114, 119] IHHNV was not detected in either published study, and 
a literature search did not identify subsequent studies performing surveillance for IHHNV in imported 
bait shrimp. 
The volume of bait shrimp imported to the United States annually is not known, because bait shrimp 
are imported under the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States, subheading 0511.91.0090 
“Products
Text Len: 1791
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 in either published study, and 
a literature search did not identify subsequent studies performing surveillance for IHHNV in imported 
bait shrimp. 
The volume of bait shrimp imported to the United States annually is not known, because bait shrimp 
are imported under the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States, subheading 0511.91.0090 
“Products of Fish or Crustacean, Molluscs, or Other Aquatic Invertebrates; Dead Animals of Chapter 3, 
Unfit for Human Consumption, NESOI.”[120] From 2015 to 2020, the United States imported an 
average 76,909,345 kg/169,556,081 lb (range 64,343,192 to 97,492,406 kg/141,852,456 to 
214,933,964 lb) of such product, including from countries with a WOAH listing for IHHNV, that have 
reported IHHNV detections in the literature, or that experienced a recent outbreak or occurrence of 
IHHNV that was reported to WOAH (Table 6). The percentage of bait shrimp in these shipments is 
unknown.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Table 6. Quantity of dead fish, crustaceans, mollusks, or other aquatic invertebrates unfit for 
human consumption exported to the United States between 2015 and 2020 from countries with 
IHHNV presence in cultured or wild shrimp populations as determined by WOAH or as reported 
in the literature.[3-5, 8-19, 120, 121] 
Country Year 2015 Year 2016 Year 2017 Year 2018 Year 2019 Year 2020 
Argentinab,c 1,942,102 2,626,144
Text Len: 1427
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 between 2015 and 2020 from countries with 
IHHNV presence in cultured or wild shrimp populations as determined by WOAH or as reported 
in the literature.[3-5, 8-19, 120, 121] 
Country Year 2015 Year 2016 Year 2017 Year 2018 Year 2019 Year 2020 
Argentinab,c 1,942,102 2,626,144 2,294,126 1,285,622 641,424 911,610 
Australiaa,b,c 3,350 1,040 6,630 2,000 1,052 468 
Canadad 43,769,276 58,584,020 51,351,640 43,871,560 51,180,538 47,799,388 
Chinaa,b 1,982,636 5,533,350 3,687,750 1,846,862 1,442,630 2,103,800 
Colombiaa,b,c 6,758 0 0 0 0 0 
Costa Ricaa,b 0 0 0 0 0 590 
Ecuadora,b,c 2,583,980 2,342,336 2,924,522 4,103,810 93,720 2,131,740 
Guatemalaa,b 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Hondurasa,b,c 0 0 0 0 0 1,000 
Indiaa,b,c 47,992 62,690 60,562 181,098 49,744 5,526 
Indonesiaa,b,c 131,636 255,822 202,194 145,382 153,366 664,058 
Japanb 205,418 855,868 781,942 520,390 1,035,364 1,639,290 
Mexicoa,
Text Len: 885
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
562 181,098 49,744 5,526 
Indonesiaa,b,c 131,636 255,822 202,194 145,382 153,366 664,058 
Japanb 205,418 855,868 781,942 520,390 1,035,364 1,639,290 
Mexicoa,b,c 5,639,276 9,128,838 15,132,120 2,524,924 1,845,292 3,518,322 
Nicaraguaa,b,c 55,002 43,924 44,686 34,058 103,858 39,608 
Panamaa,b,c 36,000 39,374 39,600 90,874 77,162 94,352 
Perua,b,c 466,462 1,641,486 341,848 92,356 1,077,084 221,300 
Philippinesa,b,c 219,336 224,614 130,252 151,064 95,546 78,708 
Singaporeb 0 0 0 0 0 0 
South Koreab 6,380,930 5,424,456 4,297,974 2,369,874 294,000 157,642 
Sri Lankaa,b,c 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Taiwanb 7,587,192 10,079,116 8,622,556 5,691,488 6,392,058 5,139,018 
Thailanda,b,c 60,840 24,256 68,296 328,298 77,266 610,878 
United 
Kingdomd 1,065,272 47,132 76,940 448,762 415,718 3,967,848 
V
Text Len: 784
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 5,691,488 6,392,058 5,139,018 
Thailanda,b,c 60,840 24,256 68,296 328,298 77,266 610,878 
United 
Kingdomd 1,065,272 47,132 76,940 448,762 415,718 3,967,848 
Venezuelab 0 0 0 0 41662 63140 
Vietnamb 280,326 577,940 775,048 654,770 1,273,290 878,942 
Total 72,463,784 97,492,406 90,838,686 64,343,192 66,290,774 70,027,228 
aWOAH listed 
bLiterature reported presence in cultured aquaculture 
cLiterature reported presence in wild shrimp populations in the Americas 
dWOAH reported outbreak in the last 2 years 
22 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
It is highly plausible that imported bait shrimp may provide a transboundary pathway of entry for IHHNV 
given the volume and sources of dead fish, crustaceans, mollusks, or other aquatic invertebrates unfit 
for human consumption exported to the United States, and the documented presence of aquatic 
pathogens present in imported bait shrimp. Lack of detection of IHHNV in the limited number of studies 
that have explored this entry pathway does not negate the potential for IHHNV introduction to occur.  
Potential Exposure Pathways  
An entry pathway, as defined by WOAH, is a pathway from the point of entry that leads to exposure of 
vulnerable animal or human populations to a hazard.[43]  
Pathway 1: Introduction of IHHNV-infected shrimp into aquaculture facilities  
As
Text Len: 1345
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HHNV introduction to occur.  
Potential Exposure Pathways  
An entry pathway, as defined by WOAH, is a pathway from the point of entry that leads to exposure of 
vulnerable animal or human populations to a hazard.[43]  
Pathway 1: Introduction of IHHNV-infected shrimp into aquaculture facilities  
As stated in the Entry Assessment, a) non-native shrimp from foreign hatcheries are imported to the 
United States for aquaculture purposes [113]; and b) IHHNV introductions in domestic shrimp 
aquaculture facilities have been epidemiologically linked to imported IHHNV-infected live shrimp in 
2013, 2018, and 2019.[2, 117]. These occurrences, and the transfer of IHHNV-infected animals 
between domestic facilities in 2019, demonstrate that a) shrimp are imported to stock aquaculture 
facilities; b) some of the imported shrimp included IHHNV-infected animals; and c) this is a documented 
exposure pathway of IHHNV introduction. These introductions have occurred despite availability of 
selectively bred specific pathogen-free (SPF) shrimp [122], regulation or permitting guidelines for non-
native shrimp culture in some States [123, 124], and guidelines and standards for importation and 
transit of aquatic animal products and disease control and prevention outlined in the WOAH Aquatic 
Animal Health Code.[2, 55] 
 
Pathway 2: Shrimp imported for human consumption  
The presence of this exposure pathway has been documented via epidemiological investigations of 
aquaculture disease outbreaks (e.g., WSSV in Australia), and research studies that have a) detected 
aquaculture pathogens, including IHHNV, in imported shrimp commodities sold in grocery stores and 
marketplaces;
Text Len: 1686
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Pathway 2: Shrimp imported for human consumption  
The presence of this exposure pathway has been documented via epidemiological investigations of 
aquaculture disease outbreaks (e.g., WSSV in Australia), and research studies that have a) detected 
aquaculture pathogens, including IHHNV, in imported shrimp commodities sold in grocery stores and 
marketplaces; and b) demonstrated transmission of WOAH-listed shrimp pathogens from imported 
shrimp seafoods to susceptible animals.[112, 114, 115, 119, 121, 125, 126] Methods by which this 
exposure pathway may occur include the following:  
 
Processing plants 
An unknown volume of imported commodity shrimp products is reprocessed in domestic plants located 
throughout the United States, including those on coastal bays and estuaries where native penaeid 
shrimp are present. Some plants may be located near shrimp aquaculture facilities.[112, 115] 
Processors of fish and fishery products are subject to Seafood HACCP Regulation (21 CFR Part 123 
and other regulation [i.e., Current Good Manufacturing Practice regulation, 21 CFR Parts 113 and 
114]).[127] However, such regulations are designed to ensure human public health; monitoring seafood 
processing for aquaculture safety is not under the purview of such regulations. Surveillance for human 
pathogens of concern is conducted as part of normal regulatory inspection, but such surveillance for 
aquaculture pathogens is not performed.  
 
23 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Primary routes of pathogen release from processing plants occur via inadequate disinfection, 
discharge, disposal, or storage of solid or liquid wastes.[128] Proximity between processing plants and 
susceptible wild or farmed shrimp populations increases the risk of disease introduction, with
Text Len: 1799
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 performed.  
 
23 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Primary routes of pathogen release from processing plants occur via inadequate disinfection, 
discharge, disposal, or storage of solid or liquid wastes.[128] Proximity between processing plants and 
susceptible wild or farmed shrimp populations increases the risk of disease introduction, with on-farm 
processing presenting the greatest level of risk, especially if the plant processes shrimp from outside 
sources.[128, 129] Data are not readily accessible on the proximity of plants that process imported 
commodity shrimp to susceptible farmed or indigenous shrimp populations.  
 
While processing plants are required to monitor waste streams to prevent inadvertent release of 
contaminants, a) the level of oversight at all plants is unknown; b) violations occur; c) there are no 
regulations requiring surveillance of processing waste for aquatic pathogens; and d) the efficacy of 
effluent, wastewater, and solid waste treatments on inactivation of IHHNV is not known. Discharge of 
effluent or wastewater containing viable IHHNV into sewer systems or coastal or inland waterways 
could provide a plausible pathway of exposure to susceptible wild and cultured shrimp 
populations.[112, 130, 131] Solid seafood processing wastes may be incorporated into wastewater 
treatment steps to produce sludge or disposed of via solid waste streams (e.g., landfills, compost, 
burying) or land application (as fertilizer). Landfill operators are required to monitor groundwater for 
microbial contamination but it is unknown a) how methods used may correlate with the presence of 
aquatic animal pathogens; and b) whether or not groundwater is monitored for presence of aquatic 
animal pathogens.[132-134] The literature has reported microbial contamination of groundwater 
associated with landfills, composting, burial
Text Len: 1885
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 fertilizer). Landfill operators are required to monitor groundwater for 
microbial contamination but it is unknown a) how methods used may correlate with the presence of 
aquatic animal pathogens; and b) whether or not groundwater is monitored for presence of aquatic 
animal pathogens.[132-134] The literature has reported microbial contamination of groundwater 
associated with landfills, composting, burial, and land application of processing plant waste slurry [132, 
133]; such research has not been conducted relative to aquaculture pathogens, including IHHNV. Lack 
of documentation does not mean that such events may not occur. Wildlife and birds that forage on 
landfills and composted or buried waste could consume IHHNV-infected tissues and serve as fomites 
or transmission vectors, transporting the virus to shrimp farms or natural water bodies. Given the 
above, it does appear plausible that waste streams associated with processing of imported shrimp 
could provide a plausible IHHNV exposure pathway.  
 
Disposal of imported shrimp seafood as waste 
Approximately 40 percent of commercial seafood produced is discarded as waste [135] with landfill 
disposal listed as the most common waste disposal pathway. Seafood waste may also be disposed of 
via composting and burial, and consumers may dispose of shrimp heads and other tissues into native 
waters.[123] The total volume of imported commodity shrimp discarded as waste is not known, and 
there are no published studies assessing a) landfilled, composted, or buried shrimp seafood waste, or 
adjacent ground or surface waters; and b) the transmission potential of wildlife and birds.  However, it 
is highly plausible that disposal of commodity shrimp wastes as described may provide a pathway of 
IHHNV exposure to susceptible crustaceans given a) the viability of IHHNV in frozen-thawed shrimp 
tissues
Text Len: 1878
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, or buried shrimp seafood waste, or 
adjacent ground or surface waters; and b) the transmission potential of wildlife and birds.  However, it 
is highly plausible that disposal of commodity shrimp wastes as described may provide a pathway of 
IHHNV exposure to susceptible crustaceans given a) the viability of IHHNV in frozen-thawed shrimp 
tissues; b) documented presence of IHHNV in imported commodity shrimp products; c) the potential 
water contamination pathways associated with landfill, composted, and buried wastes as described in 
the section above, and d) the potential for direct disposition of imported shrimp wastes into water 
bodies.[136] [137] [138-140]  
 
Use of imported shrimp seafood as bait 
Imported shrimp products intended for human consumption may be used as bait and have been 
associated with the introduction of aquatic FADs. For example, use of imported frozen uncooked 
24 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
shrimp for bait by recreational fishermen was considered the most likely pathway of WSSV introduction 
into Moreton Bay, South East Queensland, Australia in 1992.[141, 142] In 2019, a survey indicated that 
approximately 27 percent of recreational fishermen in Australia still purchase raw imported shrimp from 
supermarkets for use as bait, and that hundreds of tons of frozen imported shrimp were entering 
Australian waterways annually due to this activity. The frequency of use and volume of imported human 
food quality shrimp used as bait for sportfishing in the United States is not known. However, is 
reasonable to assume that a) this activity occurs; and b) the volume of such products used may be 
large. An internet search identified several recreational fishing sites and chat boards recommending 
use of frozen shrimp purchased from grocery stores or supermarkets; such product was described on 

Text Len: 1866
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
food quality shrimp used as bait for sportfishing in the United States is not known. However, is 
reasonable to assume that a) this activity occurs; and b) the volume of such products used may be 
large. An internet search identified several recreational fishing sites and chat boards recommending 
use of frozen shrimp purchased from grocery stores or supermarkets; such product was described on 
some sites as “superior to commercial bait shrimp.” IHHNV introductions via this pathway have not 
been reported in the United States; however, given the epidemiology of IHHNV, persistence of viable 
IHHNV in frozen shrimp tissues, and apparent use of commodity shrimp for bait in the United States, 
exposure of susceptible wild or farmed shrimp via this pathway appears plausible. 
 
Use of imported shrimp seafood as food for aquatic animals 
Imported human food quality shrimp may be used as food for aquatic animals. Zoos, aquariums, and 
similar facilities incorporate seafood into the diets of aquatic animals (e.g., cephalopods, crustaceans, 
fish, marine mammals).[143-145]  People may also incorporate frozen shrimp seafood into diets for 
aquatic pets. An internet search identified multiple websites a) recommending feeding of freeze-dried 
and/or thawed frozen fresh- and salt-water shrimp to a variety of aquatic pets; and b) advertising 
imported pet foods containing or composed of krill and/or freeze-dried or frozen fresh- and saltwater 
shrimp products for sale. The validity of this exposure pathway was demonstrated in the 1990s when 
introduction of WSSV into a population of freshwater crayfish housed at a public institution (the 
National Zoo) in the United States was traced back to the feeding of imported shrimp seafood.[115, 
146] In the United
Text Len: 1771
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 or frozen fresh- and saltwater 
shrimp products for sale. The validity of this exposure pathway was demonstrated in the 1990s when 
introduction of WSSV into a population of freshwater crayfish housed at a public institution (the 
National Zoo) in the United States was traced back to the feeding of imported shrimp seafood.[115, 
146] In the United States, transmission of IHHNV to susceptible wild or farmed shrimp populations via 
this practice has not been documented. However, it appears plausible that exposure of susceptible 
animals may occur via this exposure pathway, given that a) FAD introduction has occurred via this 
practice; b) oral IHHNV transmission can occur; c) the stability of IHHNV in thawed frozen shrimp 
tissues; d) current lack of surveillance of shrimp seafood for diseases of concern to aquaculture; and e) 
recommended incorporation of shrimp in aquatic animal diets.  
 
Pathway 3: Imported bait shrimp  
Bait shrimp are used for recreational freshwater and marine fishing. The volume of bait shrimp 
exported to the United States is unknown; however, an internet search identified a) imported bait 
shrimp (e.g., freshwater and saltwater) for sale in the United States; and b) chat boards discussing use 
of bait shrimp. There are currently no Federal regulations requiring screening of imported bait shrimp 
for aquatic pathogens of concern. Some States (e.g., Texas) do have regulations in place regarding 
use of any type of imported shrimp (e.g., live, dead, whole or in pieces) from a non-Gulf of Mexico 
State or different country as bait.[147] Rates of enforcement of and compliance with such regulations 
by fishermen are unknown. Given the accessibility of such product and recommendations for use on 
various internet sites,
Text Len: 1768
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 regulations in place regarding 
use of any type of imported shrimp (e.g., live, dead, whole or in pieces) from a non-Gulf of Mexico 
State or different country as bait.[147] Rates of enforcement of and compliance with such regulations 
by fishermen are unknown. Given the accessibility of such product and recommendations for use on 
various internet sites, it appears that bait shrimp may be used for fishing with some regularity. 
Currently, there are no published reports describing detection of IHHNV in imported bait shrimp or 
exposure of susceptible shrimp populations to IHHNV via use of bait shrimp. Lack of data or 
25 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
confirmation of an IHHNV introduction occurring via this pathway does not preclude the potential for 
exposure of susceptible wild or farmed shrimp to occur via use of bait shrimp for fishing.  
 
Pathway 4: Imported shrimp by-product 
Unknown quantities of imported shrimp meal, cuticle meal, and other byproducts are used as feed 
ingredients in aquaculture. The high temperatures used to prepare meal-type byproducts is likely 
sufficient to inactivate IHHNV, and there are no studies or field reports showing that IHHNV 
transmission has occurred via this pathway. Given this information, it does not appear plausible that 
imported shrimp byproducts incorporated into aquatic animal feeds would provide a pathway of IHHNV 
exposure to susceptible farmed shrimp.  
 
Pathway 5: Exposure via water used for aquaculture  
The literature reports that movement of aquatic pathogens, including IHHNV, via organic matter, 
plankton, and shrimp at all life stages suspended in ocean currents (e.g., from endemically affected 
areas, shipping ports, processing plants, aquac
Text Len: 1750
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
med shrimp.  
 
Pathway 5: Exposure via water used for aquaculture  
The literature reports that movement of aquatic pathogens, including IHHNV, via organic matter, 
plankton, and shrimp at all life stages suspended in ocean currents (e.g., from endemically affected 
areas, shipping ports, processing plants, aquaculture facilities) is a plausible disease exposure 
pathway for susceptible farmed and wild shrimp populations. For example, genetic analysis suggests 
that IHHNV was introduced into wild shrimp populations in the GoC via intensive penaeid shrimp 
aquaculture, and introduction of other shrimp pathogens (WSSV) from local wild populations into 
aquaculture facilities has been reported.[10, 12, 62, 112, 148, 149]  Shrimp farms that are not highly 
biosecure, are located on coastlines, have open ponds, and use seawater may be more prone to 
disease introduction via this exposure pathway.[9, 150, 151] Inland facilities and farms with good 
biosecurity measures are less likely to incur an IHHNV introduction via this pathway. Biosecurity 
measures include using deep sea water wells or underground fresh water aquifers as water sources, 
treating/filtering influent, covering rearing structures and ponds, ensuring that ponds are dried 
overwinter, and using low exchange or recirculating water systems.[150, 152] Close proximity of shrimp 
farms to other shrimp-rearing facilities, shrimp-processing plants, shipping ports, and susceptible wild 
shrimp populations, increases the risk of disease introduction as well.[5, 10, 14]  
Federal and State effluent regulations are typically specific to water quality (e.g., levels of ammonia, 
dissolved oxygen, total suspended sol
Text Len: 1693
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 of shrimp 
farms to other shrimp-rearing facilities, shrimp-processing plants, shipping ports, and susceptible wild 
shrimp populations, increases the risk of disease introduction as well.[5, 10, 14]  
Federal and State effluent regulations are typically specific to water quality (e.g., levels of ammonia, 
dissolved oxygen, total suspended solids) and do not mandate testing for presence of aquatic 
pathogens.[38] Some facility-specific and/or State mandated BMP biosecurity measures include 
effluent water treatment guidelines designed to prevent releases of aquatic pathogens and animals.[38, 
114] Aquaculture facilities typically treat influent water and use screens or filters at ingress points to 
optimize water quality and prevent introduction of aquatic pathogens or animals. Despite these control 
measures, the literature describes aquatic animal and pathogen introductions via inadequately treated 
or contaminated influent water and/or accidental intake or migration of infected crustaceans. The 
literature also describes aquatic pathogen introductions from aquaculture facilities to wild populations 
associated with release of inadequately treated effluent water and/or accidental release or migration of 
infected animals.[14, 112, 150] Unexpected water control failures (e.g., water treatment failures, 
accidental releases, weather events, overtopping of ponds, flooding) may lead to accidental exposure 
events as well. Given the above, it does appear IHHNV present in water used or discharged by shrimp 
aquaculture facilities can pose a plausible pathway of virus exposure to susceptible shrimp 
populations.  
26 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Pathway 6: Introduction of IHHNV-infected wild shrimp into aquaculture facilities (or vice versa)   
Published literature describes escape of farmed shrimp
Text Len: 1846
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 used or discharged by shrimp 
aquaculture facilities can pose a plausible pathway of virus exposure to susceptible shrimp 
populations.  
26 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Pathway 6: Introduction of IHHNV-infected wild shrimp into aquaculture facilities (or vice versa)   
Published literature describes escape of farmed shrimp from, and introduction of wild shrimp into, 
aquaculture facilities as potential mechanisms for transfer of IHHNV and other aquaculture pathogens 
(e.g., WSSV, YHV, TSV) into susceptible cultured or wild shrimp populations.[112, 153] Escapes or 
accidental releases of cultured shrimp (e.g., P. vannamei, P. monodon, M. rosenbergii) have been 
documented in continental U.S. coastal waters, Puerto Rico, and Hawaii, as have introductions of wild 
shrimp and other animals into aquaculture facilities.[77, 79, 82, 153, 154] Because most shrimp 
species cannot walk on land (except  M. dienbienphuense) such introductions likely occurred via water 
as described in previous pathway. Exposure of susceptible wild or cultured shrimp to pathogens, 
including IHHNV, has not been confirmed via this pathway, but lack of data does not preclude the 
plausibility that this pathway could occur.  
 
Pathway 7: Intentional, accidental, or malicious release  
There are no national or international reports of intentional, accidental, or malicious releases of shrimp 
or other aquaculture species a) into shrimp aquaculture facilities; or b) resulting in introduction of an 
aquatic pathogen, including IHHNV. Intentional releases may include release of pet shrimp or aquatic 
animals, or transfer
Text Len: 1634
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, or malicious release  
There are no national or international reports of intentional, accidental, or malicious releases of shrimp 
or other aquaculture species a) into shrimp aquaculture facilities; or b) resulting in introduction of an 
aquatic pathogen, including IHHNV. Intentional releases may include release of pet shrimp or aquatic 
animals, or transfer of wild aquatic animals, into aquaculture facilities.[155] Accidental releases may 
include release of farmed shrimp into natural water bodies or introduction of wild shrimp into 
aquaculture via unexpected failure of biosecurity measures, equipment, or rearing structures as 
described above. Malicious releases would include acts of sabotage or agricultural terrorism.[156, 157]   
Shrimp farms that are not highly biosecure (e.g., lack perimeter fencing, have open ponds, are near 
urban areas or roadways) may be more susceptible to release of animals into shrimp-rearing 
structures. Farms with good biosecurity measures (e.g., perimeter fencing, limited public access, or 
covered or contained rearing structures) would be less susceptible to introduction of aquatic animals or 
an aquatic pathogen. Introduction of IHHNV or other aquatic pathogens via this exposure pathway has 
not been reported; however, lack of reporting does not preclude the plausibility that diseases may be 
introduced into an aquaculture facility via these mechanisms. 
Pathways Summary 
Given available data and reference materials, the most plausible pathways of entry include a) live 
shrimp imported for use in aquaculture; b) imported commodity and bait shrimp; and c) movement of 
IHHNV in water from areas of presence to locations where naïve susceptible shrimp are present. There 
is lack of published literature definitively linking ballast water, ship fouling, or imported commodity
Text Len: 1837
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and reference materials, the most plausible pathways of entry include a) live 
shrimp imported for use in aquaculture; b) imported commodity and bait shrimp; and c) movement of 
IHHNV in water from areas of presence to locations where naïve susceptible shrimp are present. There 
is lack of published literature definitively linking ballast water, ship fouling, or imported commodity and 
bait shrimp to IHHNV entry. However, given that these are known modes of aquatic pathogen 
introduction, it is plausible that these pathways may lead to IHHNV introduction. Introduction of IHHNV 
from areas of known presence (wild and farmed shrimp) to areas where naïve shrimp populations are 
present has been documented, indicating that this is a plausible entry pathway. Live shrimp imported 
for use in aquaculture has been demonstrated to be a pathway of entry, including into the United 
States.   
The most plausible pathway of exposure for domestic aquaculture is introduction of IHHNV-infected 
shrimp into facilities, given that past IHHNV introductions have occurred via imported shrimp and 
shrimp transferred among facilities. Presence of IHHNV in water and introductions of IHHNV-infected 
wild shrimp present in water are less plausible, given that aquaculture facility influent water is likely 
27 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
filtered and treated prior to use. However, inadvertent or accidental introduction may occur via these 
mechanisms due to poor biosecurity an unexpected water quality management failure. Exposures via 
commodity shrimp, bait shrimp, shrimp by-product, and accidental, malicious, or intentional release 
appear least plausible. Plausible pathways of exposure for indigenous wild penaeid shrimp include the 
various pathways associated with commodity shrimp imported for human
Text Len: 1829
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 these 
mechanisms due to poor biosecurity an unexpected water quality management failure. Exposures via 
commodity shrimp, bait shrimp, shrimp by-product, and accidental, malicious, or intentional release 
appear least plausible. Plausible pathways of exposure for indigenous wild penaeid shrimp include the 
various pathways associated with commodity shrimp imported for human consumption, imported bait 
shrimp, presence of IHHNV in water, and accidental release of cultured shrimp. 
Potential Impacts 
IHHNV is an economically relevant viral pathogen of shrimp aquaculture. Sellars et al. 2019 reported 
that shrimp farms stocked with high viral load IHHNV-infected post-larvae shrimp resulted in reduced 
performance, lower survivability, higher food conversion ratios, and production losses approximating 
$67,000 per hectare/2.47 acres of farm gate value compared to farms stocked with post-larvae carrying 
a low to zero IHHNV viral load.[7, 56] Primary shrimp-producing States include Alabama, Arkansas, 
California, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Ohio, South 
Carolina, Tennessee, and Texas.[120] Cultivated susceptible crustaceans reared in the United States 
include whiteleg shrimp (P. vannamei), which are a principal focus of production in U.S. aquaculture. 
Most broodstock is produced in Texas, Hawaii, and Florida. Texas is the leading shrimp-producing 
State, producing 1.68 million kg/3.7 million lb. of product in 2009. In 2007, P. vannamei was considered 
the fourth most valuable aquaculture species in Texas, following catfish, red drum, and hybrid striped 
bass. In 2016, the United States produced 1.8
Text Len: 1675
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and Florida. Texas is the leading shrimp-producing 
State, producing 1.68 million kg/3.7 million lb. of product in 2009. In 2007, P. vannamei was considered 
the fourth most valuable aquaculture species in Texas, following catfish, red drum, and hybrid striped 
bass. In 2016, the United States produced 1.8 million kg/4 million lb. of shrimp, valued at $10 million 
USD. In 2019, the United States exported over $123 million USD worth of shrimp products (e.g., fresh, 
$50 million USD; frozen, $40 million USD; and prepared, $33 million USD). The top receiving countries 
were India ($20 million USD), Canada ($20 million USD), Vietnam ($14 million USD), and Denmark 
($12 million USD) (DATAWEB).  
The impact that introduction of IHHNV might have on U.S. shrimp aquaculture depends on a) where 
the introduction(s) occur; b) time to detection and reporting of the introductions; c) the number and type 
of aquaculture facilities affected; d) the type of control measures implemented; and f) surveillance and 
biosecurity measures used by the industry as preventative and outbreak response measures. The 
United States reported two disease events between January 2019 and January 2020. Both events 
were controlled with quarantine and voluntary depopulation measures. These IHHNV detections had 
serious consequences on domestic reputations and international trade, including effectively closing the 
shrimp export market to Canada since 2019. If a large-scale outbreak occurred within the industry, it is 
plausible that significant economic and export trade consequences may occur.  
Lack of capability to perform parallel or series surveillance or diagnostic testing for IHHNV and EVE 
genomic material could lead
Text Len: 1718
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 consequences on domestic reputations and international trade, including effectively closing the 
shrimp export market to Canada since 2019. If a large-scale outbreak occurred within the industry, it is 
plausible that significant economic and export trade consequences may occur.  
Lack of capability to perform parallel or series surveillance or diagnostic testing for IHHNV and EVE 
genomic material could lead to transboundary or domestic a) movement of apparently healthy IHHNV-
infected farmed shrimp; b) culling of healthy non-IHHNV infected shrimp with EVE sequences.  Both 
potential outcomes could cause local primary economic impacts to shrimp producers, secondary 
impacts to associated industries and could result in international import/export consequences.  
Assessment of the effect of IHHNV introduction into native penaeid shrimp populations was not within 
the scope of this document. The effect that such introduction may have is not known due to lack of data 
on species susceptibility to IHHNV and other factors. If native penaeid shrimp are susceptible to IHHNV 
and if environmental conditions are favorable to sustaining an outbreak, local and regional 
28 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
consequences may be impactful. Environmental consequences may be direct to the affected shrimp 
populations and could indirectly disrupt food webs and the overall ecology of affected areas. Local 
fisheries that harvest wild shrimp would be economically impacted. 
Limitations 
There are data gaps present for every pathway identified in this document that limited capability to fully 
assess their individual potential for transboundary entry or animal exposure. Unless resolved, these 
data gaps will affect capability to develop future transboundary or domestic risk assessments or risk 
analyses and to develop a domestic response plan. 
Data and resource gaps include, but are not limited to: 
• Lack
Text Len: 1937
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 every pathway identified in this document that limited capability to fully 
assess their individual potential for transboundary entry or animal exposure. Unless resolved, these 
data gaps will affect capability to develop future transboundary or domestic risk assessments or risk 
analyses and to develop a domestic response plan. 
Data and resource gaps include, but are not limited to: 
• Lack of research relative to the mechanisms of virus infection and virulence in crustacean 
species 
• Lack of research and development of diagnostic modalities relative to EVE sequences 
• Lack of data reporting on IHHNV surveillance in domestic aquaculture 
• Lack of data reporting on IHHNV surveillance in indigenous penaeid shrimp populations 
• Lack of published research exploring IHHNV accommodation and tolerance in affected shrimp 
species 
• Incomplete understanding of the effect of vial loads and performance parameters in shrimp that 
exhibit viral accommodation or tolerance  
• Lack of experimental challenge studies meeting WOAH criteria for natural exposure evaluating 
the susceptibility of farmed and native shrimp to IHHNV 
• Lack of data reporting on the volume and disposition of live shrimp imported for aquaculture 
purposes 
• Lack of data reporting on the domestic transit of live shrimp for aquaculture purposes 
• Lack of data on surveillance for IHHNV in ballast water and fouling present on ship hulls 
• Lack of data and hydrological modelling studies evaluating the potential for movement of 
IHHNV from a) potential points of entry to susceptible wild and cultured shrimp population; b) 
known areas of IHHNV presence into the coastal waters of the United States  
• Lack of data reporting IHHNV presence in imported commodity and bait shrimp 
• Lack of data on disposition pathways for commodity shrimp, including waste streams 
• Lack of data on the volume and disposition pathways
Text Len: 1909
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 from a) potential points of entry to susceptible wild and cultured shrimp population; b) 
known areas of IHHNV presence into the coastal waters of the United States  
• Lack of data reporting IHHNV presence in imported commodity and bait shrimp 
• Lack of data on disposition pathways for commodity shrimp, including waste streams 
• Lack of data on the volume and disposition pathways for imported bait shrimp 
• Lack of data on the volume of imported commodity, bait shrimp, or shrimp by-product used as 
food for aquatic animals 
• Lack of data regarding aquaculture facilities’ BMPs, biosecurity measures, disease surveillance 
practices, and other factors  
• Lack of studies modelling potential distribution of IHHNV-susceptible penaeid shrimp species 
and the IHHV virus  
 
 
 
29 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
References 
 
1. Yu, J.-Y., et al., Research progress on hosts and carriers, prevalence, virulence of infectious 
hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV). Journal of Invertebrate Pathology, 
2021. 183: p. 107556. 
2. Awada, Current Animal Health Situation Worldwide: Analysis of Events and Trends. 2020. 
3. Saravanan, K., et al., IHHNV infection from the wild shrimps of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, 
India. Current Science, 2017: p. 2027-2031. 
4. Ramírez, B., et al., A cross‐sectional study of shrimp pathogens in wild shrimp, Penaeus 
vannamei and Penaeus stylirostris in Tumbes, Peru. Aquaculture Research, 2021. 52(3): p
Text Len: 1479
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Nicobar Islands, 
India. Current Science, 2017: p. 2027-2031. 
4. Ramírez, B., et al., A cross‐sectional study of shrimp pathogens in wild shrimp, Penaeus 
vannamei and Penaeus stylirostris in Tumbes, Peru. Aquaculture Research, 2021. 52(3): p. 
1118-1126. 
5. Hernández-Pérez, A., et al., Presence of infectious hypodermal and haematopoietic necrosis 
virus (IHHNV) in native shrimps from southern Mexico. Open Journal of Marine Science, 2017. 
7(03): p. 424. 
6. (OIE), W.O.f.A.H., Manual of Diagnostic Tests for Aquatic Animals. 7th Edition ed. 2018. 
7. Aranguren Caro, L.F., et al., Current status of infection with infectious hypodermal and 
hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV) in the Peruvian and Ecuadorian shrimp industry. Plos 
one, 2022. 17(8): p. e0272456. 
8. Lightner, D.V., R. Redman, and T. Bell, Infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis, a 
newly recognized virus disease of penaeid shrimp. Journal of Invertebrate Pathology, 1983. 
42(1): p. 62-70. 
9. Robles-Sikisaka, R., et al., Genetic signature of rapid IHHNV (infectious hypodermal and 
hematopoietic necrosis virus) expansion in wild penaeus shrimp populations. PLoS One, 2010. 
5(7):
Text Len: 1169
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
tebrate Pathology, 1983. 
42(1): p. 62-70. 
9. Robles-Sikisaka, R., et al., Genetic signature of rapid IHHNV (infectious hypodermal and 
hematopoietic necrosis virus) expansion in wild penaeus shrimp populations. PLoS One, 2010. 
5(7): p. e11799. 
10. Pantoja, C., D. Lightner, and K. Holtschmit, Prevalence and geographic distribution of infectious 
hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV) in wild blue shrimp Penaeus stylirostris 
from the Gulf of California, Mexico. Journal of Aquatic Animal Health, 1999. 11(1): p. 23-34. 
11. Unzueta-Bustamante, M.L., et al., Infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus 
(IHHNV) in wild parent stocks of blue shrimp, Penaeus styfirostris (Stimpson), in Guaymas Bay, 
Sonora, Mexico. Ciencias Marinas, 1998. 24(4): p. 491-498. 
12. Dhar, A.K., et al., Biology, genome organization, and evolution of parvoviruses in marine 
shrimp. Advances in virus research, 2014. 89: p. 85-139. 
13. Nunan, L.M., et al., Prevalence of infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus 
(IHHNV) and white spot syndrome virus (WSSV) in Litopenaeus vannamei in the Pacific Ocean 
off the coast of Panama. Journal of the World Aquaculture Society, 2001
Text Len: 1200
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. 
13. Nunan, L.M., et al., Prevalence of infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus 
(IHHNV) and white spot syndrome virus (WSSV) in Litopenaeus vannamei in the Pacific Ocean 
off the coast of Panama. Journal of the World Aquaculture Society, 2001. 32(3): p. 330-334. 
14. Macías-Rodríguez, N.A., et al., Prevalence of viral pathogens WSSV and IHHNV in wild 
organisms at the Pacific Coast of Mexico. Journal of invertebrate pathology, 2014. 116: p. 8-12. 
15. Alfaro Aguilera, R., M. Guevara Torres, and I. Gonzales Chávez, Prevalencia y distribución de 
los principales agentes etiológicos que afectan los langostinos silvestres en Tumbes, Perú. 
Revista Peruana de Biología, 2010. 17(3): p. 359-364. 
16. Vega‐Heredia, S., F. Mendoza‐Cano, and A. Sánchez‐Paz, The infectious hypodermal and 
haematopoietic necrosis virus: a brief review of what we do and do not know. Transboundary 
and Emerging Diseases, 2012. 59(2): p. 95-105. 
17. Lightner, D., et al., Historic emergence, impact and current status of shrimp pathogens in the 
Americas. Journal of invertebrate pathology, 2012. 110(2): p. 174-183. 
18. Motte, E., et al., Prevention of IHHNV vertical transmission in the
Text Len: 1190
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. 59(2): p. 95-105. 
17. Lightner, D., et al., Historic emergence, impact and current status of shrimp pathogens in the 
Americas. Journal of invertebrate pathology, 2012. 110(2): p. 174-183. 
18. Motte, E., et al., Prevention of IHHNV vertical transmission in the white shrimp Litopenaeus 
vannamei. Aquaculture, 2003. 219(1-4): p. 57-70. 
19. Jiménez, R., et al., Infection of IHHN virus in two species of cultured penaeoid shrimp 
Litopenaeus vannamei (Boone) and Litopenaeus stylirostris (Stimpson) in Ecuador during El 
Niño 1997–98. Aquaculture research, 1999. 30(9): p. 695-705. 
30 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
20. Cavalli, L.S., et al., Natural occurrence of White spot syndrome virus and Infectious hypodermal 
and hematopoietic necrosis virus in Neohelice granulata crab. Journal of invertebrate pathology, 
2013. 114(1): p. 86-88. 
21. Vilasboa, A., et al., Haplotype-specific single-locus multiplex PCR assay for identification of 
Pacific and Atlantic white shrimps, exotic Litopenaeus vannamei and native Litopenaeus 
schmitti, along the coast of Brazil. Conservation Genetics Resources, 2020. 12(1): p. 93-98. 
22. Dhar, A.K., et al., Biology, genome organization, and evolution of parvoviruses in marine 
shrimp, in Advances in virus research
Text Len: 1280
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Litopenaeus vannamei and native Litopenaeus 
schmitti, along the coast of Brazil. Conservation Genetics Resources, 2020. 12(1): p. 93-98. 
22. Dhar, A.K., et al., Biology, genome organization, and evolution of parvoviruses in marine 
shrimp, in Advances in virus research. 2014, Elsevier. p. 85-139. 
23. (OIE), W.O.f.A.H. OIE World Animal Health  Information System Report Archive IHHNV.; 
Available from: https://www.oie.int/wahis_2/public/wahid.php/Diseaseinformation/reportarchive. 
24. (USDA), U.S.D.o.A.-A.a.P.H.I.S. NVAP Reference Guide. 2021; Available from: 
www.aphis.usda.gov/aphis/ourfocus/animalhealth/nvap/NVAP-Reference-Guide/Animal-Health-
Emergency-Management/Notifiable-Diseases-and-Conditions. 
25. Guard, U.C., Standards for living organisms in ships’ ballast water discharged in US waters. 
Federal Register, 2012. 77: p. 17254-17320. 
26. Guard, U.S.C. USCG Ballast Water Management Regulation. 2012; Available from: 
https://www.ballast-water-treatment.com/en/ballast-water-management-regulation/uscg-bwm-
standards. 
27. Office, G.P., Code of Federal Regulation Title 46 Chapter I Subchapter Q Part 162 Subpart 
162.060  Ballast Water Management Systems, U.S.C. Guard
Text Len: 1192
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
https://www.ballast-water-treatment.com/en/ballast-water-management-regulation/uscg-bwm-
standards. 
27. Office, G.P., Code of Federal Regulation Title 46 Chapter I Subchapter Q Part 162 Subpart 
162.060  Ballast Water Management Systems, U.S.C. Guard, Editor. 2020. 
28. Ruiz, G., et al., Status and trends of ballast water management in the United States. First 
Biennial Report of the National Ballast Information Clearinghouse. Submitted to United States 
Coast Guard, 2001. 16. 
29. Gray, D.K., et al., Efficacy of open‐ocean ballast water exchange as a means of preventing 
invertebrate invasions between freshwater ports. Limnology and Oceanography, 2007. 52(6): p. 
2386-2397. 
30. Hwang, J., et al., High diversity and potential translocation of DNA viruses in ballast water. 
Marine pollution bulletin, 2018. 137: p. 449-455. 
31. Kim, Y., et al., Metagenomic investigation of viral communities in ballast water. Environmental 
science & technology, 2015. 49(14): p. 8396-8407. 
32. (EPA), U.S.E.P.A. Seafood Processing Effluent Guidelines. Available from: 
https://www.epa.gov/eg/seafood-processing-effluent-guidelines. 
33. (EPA), U.S.E.P.A. Summary of the Clean Water Act. 2020; Available from: 
https://www.epa.gov/laws-regulations/summary-clean-water-act. 
Text Len: 1273
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
: 
https://www.epa.gov/eg/seafood-processing-effluent-guidelines. 
33. (EPA), U.S.E.P.A. Summary of the Clean Water Act. 2020; Available from: 
https://www.epa.gov/laws-regulations/summary-clean-water-act. 
34. (EPA), U.S.E.P.A. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). 2020; Available 
from: https://www.epa.gov/npdes. 
35. (EPA), U.S.E.P.A. Concentrated Aquatic Animal Production Effluent Guidelines. 2020; Available 
from: https://www.epa.gov/eg/concentrated-aquatic-animal-production-effluent-guidelines. 
36. NPDES Aquaculture Permitting. Available from: www.epa.gov/npdes/npdes-aquaculture-
permitting. 
37. Hopkins, J.S., et al., Environmental impacts of shrimp farming with special reference to the 
situation in the continental United States. Estuaries, 1995. 18(1): p. 25-42. 
38. Galitzine, V., S. Morgan, and J. Harvey, Seafood Watch. FishWise US Farmed Shrimp Report, 2009. 
39. Wildlife, T.P.a., Aquatic Surveys, Introductions, and Relocations: Best Management Practices to 
Prevent or Minimize Aquatic Invasive Species (AIS) Transfer. 
40. Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, D.o.A., Aquaculture Best 
Managment Practices Manual, D.o.A. Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer
Text Len: 1235
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
P.a., Aquatic Surveys, Introductions, and Relocations: Best Management Practices to 
Prevent or Minimize Aquatic Invasive Species (AIS) Transfer. 
40. Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, D.o.A., Aquaculture Best 
Managment Practices Manual, D.o.A. Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer 
Services, Editor. 2016. 
41. Florida Department of Agricultgure and Consumer Services, D.o.A. Penaeid Shrimp Aquaculture: 
Rules and Regulations. Available from: https://www.fdacs.gov/content/download/78926/file/FDACS-P-
01787-Penaeid_Shrimp_Aqua_Rules_Regulations.pdf. 
31 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
42. Center, T.N.A.L. Aquaculture: An Overview. Available from: 
https://nationalaglawcenter.org/overview/aquaculture/. 
43. OIE, Terrestrial Animal Health Code. Chapter 2.1 Import Risk Analysis. 2019. 
44. Pénzes, J.J., et al., Molecular biology and structure of a novel penaeid shrimp densovirus 
elucidate convergent parvoviral host capsid evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 2020. 117(33): p. 20211-20222. 
45. Benson, D.A., et al., GenBank. Nucleic acids research, 2018. 46(D1): p. D41-D47. 
46. Dhar, A.K., et al., Genetic Relatedness of Infectious Hypodermal and Hematopoietic Necrosis 
Virus Isolates, United
Text Len: 1281
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
222. 
45. Benson, D.A., et al., GenBank. Nucleic acids research, 2018. 46(D1): p. D41-D47. 
46. Dhar, A.K., et al., Genetic Relatedness of Infectious Hypodermal and Hematopoietic Necrosis 
Virus Isolates, United States, 2019. Emerging infectious diseases, 2022. 28(2): p. 373. 
47. Tang, K.F. and D.V. Lightner, Low sequence variation among isolates of infectious hypodermal 
and hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV) originating from Hawaii and the Americas. Diseases 
of aquatic organisms, 2002. 49(2): p. 93-97. 
48. Saksmerprome, V., et al., Detection of infectious hypodermal and haematopoietic necrosis virus 
(IHHNV) in farmed Australian Penaeus monodon by PCR analysis and DNA sequencing. 
Aquaculture, 2010. 298(3-4): p. 190-193. 
49. Fajardo, C., et al., Molecular characterization of strains of decapod penstyldensovirus 1 (PstDV1) 
isolated in farmed Litopenaeus vannamei from Venezuela. Aquaculture, 2015. 436: p. 34-39. 
50. Taengchaiyaphum, S., et al., Shrimp Parvovirus Circular DNA Fragments Arise From Both 
Endogenous Viral Elements and the Infecting Virus. Frontiers in immunology, 2021: p. 3979. 
51. Taengchaiyaphum, S., et al., Shrimp genome sequence contains independent clusters of 
ancient and current End
Text Len: 1230
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
um, S., et al., Shrimp Parvovirus Circular DNA Fragments Arise From Both 
Endogenous Viral Elements and the Infecting Virus. Frontiers in immunology, 2021: p. 3979. 
51. Taengchaiyaphum, S., et al., Shrimp genome sequence contains independent clusters of 
ancient and current Endogenous Viral Elements (EVE) of the parvovirus IHHNV. BMC 
genomics, 2022. 23(1): p. 1-12. 
52. Shen, H., W. Zhang, and S. Shao, Phylogenetic and recombination analysis of genomic 
sequences of IHHNV. Journal of Basic Microbiology, 2015. 55(8): p. 1048-1052. 
53. Cowley, J.A., M. Rao, and G.J. Coman, Real-time PCR tests to specifically detect IHHNV 
lineages and an IHHNV EVE integrated in the genome of Penaeus monodon. Diseases of 
aquatic organisms, 2018. 129(2): p. 145-158. 
54. Huerlimann, R., et al., Genome assembly of the Australian black tiger shrimp (Penaeus 
monodon) reveals a novel fragmented IHHNV EVE sequence. G3, 2022. 12(4): p. jkac034. 
55. (OIE), W.O.f.A.H., Aquatic Animal Health Code. 22nd ed. 2019. 
56. Sellars, M., et al., Reduced growth performance of black tiger shrimp (Penaeus monodon) infected 
with infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus. Aquaculture, 2019. 499: p. 160-166. 
57. Hsieh,
Text Len: 1215
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
H., Aquatic Animal Health Code. 22nd ed. 2019. 
56. Sellars, M., et al., Reduced growth performance of black tiger shrimp (Penaeus monodon) infected 
with infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus. Aquaculture, 2019. 499: p. 160-166. 
57. Hsieh, C.Y., et al., Infectious hypodermal and haematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV) infections 
in giant freshwater prawn, Macrobrachium rosenbergii. Aquaculture, 2006. 258(1-4): p. 73-79. 
58. Rai, P., et al., Genomics, molecular epidemiology and diagnostics of infectious hypodermal and 
hematopoietic necrosis virus. Indian Journal of Virology, 2012. 23(2): p. 203-214. 
59. Yuan, Y., et al., PCR detecting types by the OIE standards for infectious hypodermal and 
hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV) in farmed shrimp. Progess in Fishery Sciences, 2015. 
36(1): p. 67-73. 
60. Fan, D., et al., Epidemiology of infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus in 
Macrobrachium rosenbergii. Oceanologia et Limnologia Sinica/Hai Yang Yu Hu Chao, 2015. 
46(5): p. 1153-1159. 
61. Nita, M.H., et al., Detection and genetic profiling of infectious hypodermal and haematopoietic 
necrosis virus (IHHNV) infections in wild berried freshwater prawn, Macrobrachium rosenbergii 
Text Len: 1231
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Yang Yu Hu Chao, 2015. 
46(5): p. 1153-1159. 
61. Nita, M.H., et al., Detection and genetic profiling of infectious hypodermal and haematopoietic 
necrosis virus (IHHNV) infections in wild berried freshwater prawn, Macrobrachium rosenbergii 
collected for hatchery production. Molecular biology reports, 2012. 39(4): p. 3785-3790. 
62. Martorelli, S.R., R.M. Overstreet, and J.A. Jovonovich, First report of viral pathogens WSSV 
and IHHNV in Argentine crustaceans. Bulletin of marine science, 2010. 86(1): p. 117-131. 
63. Chen, B.-K., et al., Iinfectious hypodermal and haematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV) infection 
in freshwater crayfish Procambarus clarkii. Aquaculture, 2017. 477: p. 76-79. 
64. Yang, B., et al., Evidence of existence of infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis 
virus in penaeid shrimp cultured in China. Veterinary microbiology, 2007. 120(1-2): p. 63-70. 
32 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
65. Wei, Y.W., D.D. Fan, and J. Chen, The mussel M ytilus edulis L. as an important reservoir of 
infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV). Aquaculture Research, 2017. 
48(3): p. 1346-1350. 
66. Caipang, C
Text Len: 1173
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 D.D. Fan, and J. Chen, The mussel M ytilus edulis L. as an important reservoir of 
infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV). Aquaculture Research, 2017. 
48(3): p. 1346-1350. 
66. Caipang, C.M.A., M.F.J. Sibonga, and J.S. Geduspan, Rapid detection of the Philippine isolate 
of Infectious Hypodermal and Hematopoietic Necrosis Virus (IHHNV) in shrimp, Penaeus 
monodon using Loop-Mediated isothermal Amplification (LAMP). International Journal of Animal 
and Veterinary Advances, 2012. 4(3): p. 229-234. 
67. Administration, N.O.a.A. White Shrimp. Available from: 
https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/species/white-shrimp. 
68. Base, S. Farfantepenaeus californiensis: yellowleg shrimp. Available from: 
https://www.sealifebase.ca/summary/Farfantepenaeus-californiensis.html. 
69. Paez-Osuna, F. and L. Tron-Mayen, Distribution of heavy metals in tissues of the shrimp 
Penaeus californiensis from the northwest coast of Mexico. Bulletin of Environmental 
Contamination and Toxicology, 1995. 55(2). 
70. Warkentine, B.E. and J.W. Rachlin, The first record of Palaemon macrodactylus (Oriental 
Shrimp) from the eastern coast of North America. Northeastern naturalist, 2010.
Text Len: 1190
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 northwest coast of Mexico. Bulletin of Environmental 
Contamination and Toxicology, 1995. 55(2). 
70. Warkentine, B.E. and J.W. Rachlin, The first record of Palaemon macrodactylus (Oriental 
Shrimp) from the eastern coast of North America. Northeastern naturalist, 2010. 17(1): p. 91-102. 
71. (NOAA), N.O.a.A.A. Pink Shrimp: An Overview. Available from: 
https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/species/pink-shrimp. 
72. (FAO), F.a.A.O.o.t.U.N. Penaeus aztecus. Available from: http://www.fao.org/fishery/species/3400/en. 
73. (FAO), F.a.A.O.o.t.U.N. Penaeus duorarum: Species Fact Sheet. Available from: 
http://www.fao.org/fishery/species/3402/en. 
74. (FAO), F.a.A.O.o.t.U.N. Mytilus edulis: species fact sheets. Available from: 
http://www.fao.org/fishery/species/2688/en. 
75. Muncy, R.J., Species profiles: life histories and environmental requirements of coastal fishes 
and invertebrates (south Atlantic): white shrimp. Vol. 82. 1984: The Service. 
76. Valenzuela-Jiménez, M., et al., North Atlantic white shrimp Litopenaeus setiferus (Decapoda: 
Penaeidae) as an
Text Len: 1064
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, R.J., Species profiles: life histories and environmental requirements of coastal fishes 
and invertebrates (south Atlantic): white shrimp. Vol. 82. 1984: The Service. 
76. Valenzuela-Jiménez, M., et al., North Atlantic white shrimp Litopenaeus setiferus (Decapoda: 
Penaeidae) as an aquaculture target species for farming: a review. Latin american journal of 
aquatic research, 2020. 48(2): p. 167-178. 
77. (USGS), U.S.G.S. Macrobrachium rosenbergii. Available from: 
https://nas.er.usgs.gov/queries/factsheet.aspx?SpeciesID=1203. 
78. (USGS), U.S.G.S., Oreochromis aureus. 
79. (USGS), U.S.G.S. Litopenaeus vannamei. Available from: 
https://nas.er.usgs.gov/queries/factsheet.aspx?SpeciesID=1212. 
80. Survey, U.S.G., Procambarus clarkii. 
81. Base, S. Calliinectes arcuatus: arched swimming crab. Available from: 
https://www.sealifebase.ca/summary/Callinectes-arcuatus.html. 
82. Handbook, E.I.S.M., Penaeus monodon: giant tiger prawn. 
83. Institute, T.I.S., Penaeus monodon: Giant Tiger Prawn. 
84. Portal, M.S.I. Triangle tanner crab (Chionoecetes angulatus). Available from: http://species-

Text Len: 1101
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

82. Handbook, E.I.S.M., Penaeus monodon: giant tiger prawn. 
83. Institute, T.I.S., Penaeus monodon: Giant Tiger Prawn. 
84. Portal, M.S.I. Triangle tanner crab (Chionoecetes angulatus). Available from: http://species-
identification.org/species.php?species_group=crabs_of_japan&id=878. 
85. Species, G.o.C.F.a.O.A. Tanner Crab. Available from: https://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/species-
especes/profiles-profils/tanner-crab-crabe-neiges-pac-eng.html  
86. (MarLIN), T.M.L.I.N. Common mussel (Mytilus edulis). Available from: 
https://www.marlin.ac.uk/species/detail/1421. 
87. Mallet, A.L. and C.E. Carver, Comparative growth and survival patterns of Mytilus trossulus and 
Mytilus edulis in Atlantic Canada. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 1995. 
52(9): p. 1873-1880. 
88. Fishbase. Gerres cinerus (Yellow fin majarra). Available from: https://www.fishbase.de/summary/1054. 
89. Manual of Diagnostic Tests for Aquatic Animals. 2019. 
33 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
90. Tang, K.F., S.A. Navarro, and D.V. Lightner, PCR assay for discriminating between infectious 
hyp
Text Len: 1103
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 from: https://www.fishbase.de/summary/1054. 
89. Manual of Diagnostic Tests for Aquatic Animals. 2019. 
33 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
90. Tang, K.F., S.A. Navarro, and D.V. Lightner, PCR assay for discriminating between infectious 
hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV) and virus-related sequences in the 
genome of Penaeus monodon. Diseases of aquatic organisms, 2007. 74(2): p. 165-170. 
91. Hines, A., et al., Biological invasions of cold-water coastal ecosystems: ballast-mediated 
introductions in Port Valdez/Prince William Sound, Alaska. Final Report to Regional Citizens 
Advisory Council of Prince William Sound, 2000. 340. 
92. Pughiuc, D., Invasive species: Ballast water battles. Seaways, March, 2010: p. 5-7. 
93. Hurley, T., Company Hit with Record Fine for Illegal Ocean Dump, in Honolulu Star-Advisor. 
February 11, 2020. 
94. Whittington, R.J., et al., Counting the dead to determine the source and transmission of the 
marine herpesvirus OsHV-1 in Crassostrea gigas. Veterinary research, 2018. 49(1): p. 34. 
95. Liu, O., et al., Detection of ostreid herpesvirus-1 in plankton and seawater samples at an 
estuary scale. Diseases of Aquatic Organisms, 2020. 138: p. 1-15. 
96. Paul-Pont, I., et al., Experimental infections of Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas using the 
Australian
Text Len: 1336
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. Liu, O., et al., Detection of ostreid herpesvirus-1 in plankton and seawater samples at an 
estuary scale. Diseases of Aquatic Organisms, 2020. 138: p. 1-15. 
96. Paul-Pont, I., et al., Experimental infections of Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas using the 
Australian ostreid herpesvirus-1 (OsHV-1) µVar strain. Diseases of aquatic organisms, 2015. 
113(2): p. 137-147. 
97. Evans, O., I. Paul-Pont, and R.J. Whittington, Detection of ostreid herpesvirus 1 microvariant DNA 
in aquatic invertebrate species, sediment and other samples collected from the Georges River 
estuary, New South Wales, Australia. Diseases of aquatic organisms, 2017. 122(3): p. 247-255. 
98. Lepley, L., et al., Circulation in the northern Gulf of California from orbital photographs and ship 
investigations. Ciencias Marinas, 1975. 2(2): p. 86-93. 
99. Robles-Sikisaka, R., et al., Patterns of Viral Disease Prevalence and Relative Viral Load In Wild 
Penaeid Shrimp. REFUGIO ROBLES-SIKISAKA, 2009. 1050: p. 48. 
100. Information, G.N.a., World maps. 
101. Project, O.B. Ocean Currents Map. Available from: https://oceanblueproject.org/ocean-currents-map/. 
102. Chavez, F.P., et al., The northern Humboldt Current System: Brief history, present status and a 
view towards the future. Progress
Text Len: 1273
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.N.a., World maps. 
101. Project, O.B. Ocean Currents Map. Available from: https://oceanblueproject.org/ocean-currents-map/. 
102. Chavez, F.P., et al., The northern Humboldt Current System: Brief history, present status and a 
view towards the future. Progress in Oceanography, 2008. 
103. Checkley Jr, D.M. and J.A. Barth, Patterns and processes in the California Current System. 
Progress in Oceanography, 2009. 83(1-4): p. 49-64. 
104. Evans, D.L., S.R. Signorini, and L.B. Miranda, A note on the transport of the Brazil Current. 
Journal of Physical Oceanography, 1983. 13(9): p. 1732-1738. 
105. Gyory, J., A.J. Mariano, and E.H. Ryan, The Gulf Stream. Ocean surface currents. RSMAS (Rosenstiel 
School of Marine and Atmospheric Science, the University of Miami): http://oceancurrents. rsmas. 
miami. edu/atlantic/gulf-stream. html (accessed December 30, 2006), 2006. 
106. Lee, T.N., et al., Florida Current meanders and gyre formation in the southern Straits of Florida. 
Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 1995. 100(C5): p. 8607-8620. 
107. Lynn, R.J. and J.J. Simpson, The California Current System: The seasonal variability of its physical 
characteristics. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 1987. 92(C12): p. 12947-12966. 
108. Meinen
Text Len: 1259
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ceans, 1995. 100(C5): p. 8607-8620. 
107. Lynn, R.J. and J.J. Simpson, The California Current System: The seasonal variability of its physical 
characteristics. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 1987. 92(C12): p. 12947-12966. 
108. Meinen, C.S., M.O. Baringer, and R.F. Garcia, Florida Current transport variability: An analysis 
of annual and longer-period signals. Deep Sea Research Part I: Oceanographic Research 
Papers, 2010. 57(7): p. 835-846. 
109. Zhu, Y. and X. Liang, Coupling of the Surface and Near‐Bottom Currents in the Gulf of Mexico. 
Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 2020. 125(11): p. e2020JC016488. 
110. Schaudt, K., et al. A Look at Currents in the Gulf of Mexico in 1999-2000. in Offshore 
Technology Conference. 2001. OnePetro. 
111. Zavala-Hidalgo, J., et al., Seasonal upwelling on the western and southern shelves of the Gulf 
of Mexico. Ocean dynamics, 2006. 56(3): p. 333-338. 
112. AQUACULTURE, J.-J.S.O., An evaluation of potencial shrimp virus impacts on cultured shrimp 
and on wild shrimp populations in the Gulf of Mexico and Southeastern US Atlantic Coastal 
Waters. National Marine Fisheries Service, Washington, 1997. 
113. Miami Aqua-culture, I., Marine Shrimp. 
34 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
114. Hasson, K., et al., White-spot
Text Len: 1303
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 impacts on cultured shrimp 
and on wild shrimp populations in the Gulf of Mexico and Southeastern US Atlantic Coastal 
Waters. National Marine Fisheries Service, Washington, 1997. 
113. Miami Aqua-culture, I., Marine Shrimp. 
34 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
114. Hasson, K., et al., White-spot syndrome virus (WSSV) introduction into the Gulf of Mexico and 
Texas freshwater systems through imported, frozen bait-shrimp. Diseases of Aquatic 
Organisms, 2006. 71(2): p. 91-100. 
115. Lightner, D., et al., Risk of spread of penaeid shrimp viruses in the Americas by the international 
movement of live and frozen shrimp [infectious hypodermal and haematopoietic necrosis, taura 
syndrome, white spot syndrome, yellow head syndrome]. Revue Scientifique et Technique de 
l'OIE (France), 1997. 
116. Krabsetsve, K., B.R. Cullen, and L. Owens, Rediscovery of the Australian strain of infectious 
hypodermal and haematopoietic necrosis virus. Diseases of aquatic organisms, 2004. 61(1-2): 
p. 153-158. 
117. (OIE), W.O.f.A.H. World Animal Health Informatioin Database (WAHIS) Interface. Available 
from: https://www.oie.int/wahis_2/public/wahid.php/Wahidhome/Home. 
118. Reville, C., et al., White spot syndrome virus in frozen shrimp sold at Massachusetts 
supermarkets. Journal of Shellfish Research, 2005. 24(1): p. 285-290. 

Text Len: 1345
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

from: https://www.oie.int/wahis_2/public/wahid.php/Wahidhome/Home. 
118. Reville, C., et al., White spot syndrome virus in frozen shrimp sold at Massachusetts 
supermarkets. Journal of Shellfish Research, 2005. 24(1): p. 285-290. 
119. Prior, S., A. Segars, and C. Browdy, A preliminary assessment of live and frozen bait shrimp as 
indicators and/or vectors for shrimp viruses. Aquaculture, 2001: p. 21-25. 
120. Commission, U.S.I.T. Dataweb. Available from: https://dataweb.usitc.gov/. 
121. Park, S.C., et al., Detection of infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus and 
white spot syndrome virus in whiteleg shrimp (Penaeus vannamei) imported from Vietnam to 
South Korea. Journal of Veterinary Science, 2020. 21(2). 
122. Library, U.S.D.o.A.N.A. Shrimp Aquaculture Project AZ, HI, LA, MA, MS, SC,  and TX. Available 
from: https://www.nal.usda.gov/fsrio/research-projects/shrimp-aquaculture-
projectazhilamamsscand-tx. 
123. Consortium, S.C.S.G. Shrimp Aquaculture: Challenges and Potential. Available from: 
https://www.scseagrant.org/shrimp-aquaculture-challenges-and-potential/   
124. Services, F.D.o.A.a.C. Import/Export Requirements for Aquac
Text Len: 1167
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
123. Consortium, S.C.S.G. Shrimp Aquaculture: Challenges and Potential. Available from: 
https://www.scseagrant.org/shrimp-aquaculture-challenges-and-potential/   
124. Services, F.D.o.A.a.C. Import/Export Requirements for Aquaculture Products. Available from: 
https://www.fdacs.gov/content/download/78858/file/FDACS-P%E2%80%9301785-Import-
Export-Requirements_2019.pdf. 
125. McColl, K., et al., Detection of white spot syndrome virus and yellowhead virus in prawns 
imported into Australia. Australian veterinary journal, 2004. 82(1‐2): p. 69-74. 
126. Ueda, R., K. Krabsetsve, and L. Owens, Polymerase chain reaction detection of Taura Syndrome 
Virus and infectious hypodermal and haematopoietic necrosis virus in frozen commodity tails of 
Penaeus vannamei Boone. Aquaculture Research, 2008. 39(15): p. 1606-1611. 
127. FDA), U.S.D.o.H.H.S.F.a.D.A.H. Code of Federal Regulations Title 21. 2020; Available from: 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?CFRPart=589. 
128. Oidtmann, B., et al., Risk-based methods for fish and terrestrial animal disease surveillance. 
Preventive veterinary medicine, 2013. 112(1-2): p. 13-26. 
Text Len: 1162
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?CFRPart=589. 
128. Oidtmann, B., et al., Risk-based methods for fish and terrestrial animal disease surveillance. 
Preventive veterinary medicine, 2013. 112(1-2): p. 13-26. 
129. Oidtmann, B., et al., Ranking freshwater fish farms for the risk of pathogen introduction and 
spread. Preventive veterinary medicine, 2011. 102(4): p. 329-340. 
130. Soto, M.A., V.R. Shervette, and J.M. Lotz, Transmission of white spot syndrome virus (WSSV) 
to Litopenaeus vannamei from infected cephalothorax, abdomen, or whole shrimp cadaver. 
Diseases of aquatic organisms, 2001. 45(2): p. 81-87. 
131. Islam, M.S., S. Khan, and M. Tanaka, Waste loading in shrimp and fish processing effluents: 
potential source of hazards to the coastal and nearshore environments. Marine pollution 
bulletin, 2004. 49(1-2): p. 103-110. 
132. Agency, E.P. Landfill Effluent Guidelines. Available from: https://www.epa.gov/eg/landfills-
effluent-guidelines. 
133. Agency, U.S.E.P., Municipal Solid Waste Landfills. 2018. 
134. Office, G.P., Code of Fegeral Regulations Title 40 Chapter I Subchapter N Part 445 Landfills 
Point Source Category, E.P. Agency, Editor. 2020. 
35 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
Text Len: 1238
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
133. Agency, U.S.E.P., Municipal Solid Waste Landfills. 2018. 
134. Office, G.P., Code of Fegeral Regulations Title 40 Chapter I Subchapter N Part 445 Landfills 
Point Source Category, E.P. Agency, Editor. 2020. 
35 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
135. Love, D.C., et al., Wasted seafood in the United States: Quantifying loss from production to 
consumption and moving toward solutions. Global Environmental Change, 2015. 35: p. 116-124. 
136. Gunders, D. and J. Bloom, Wasted: How America is losing up to 40 percent of its food from 
farm to fork to landfill. 2017: Natural Resources Defense Council New York. 
137. Garza, J., et al., Demonstration of infectious Taura syndrome virus in the feces of seagulls 
collected during an epizootic in Texas. Journal of Aquatic Animal Health, 1997. 9(2): p. 156-159. 
138. Gerba, C.P., et al., Sources of microbial pathogens in municipal solid waste landfills in the 
United States of America. Waste Management & Research, 2011. 29(8): p. 781-790. 
139. Grisey, E., et al., Survival of pathogenic and indicator organisms in groundwater and landfill leachate 
through coupling bacterial enumeration with tracer tests. Desalination, 2010. 261(1-2): p. 162-168. 
140. Xiang, R., et al., Isolation distance between municipal solid waste landfills and drinking water 
wells for bacteria attenuation and safe drinking. Scientific Reports, 2019. 9(1): p. 1-11. 
141
Text Len: 1421
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 bacterial enumeration with tracer tests. Desalination, 2010. 261(1-2): p. 162-168. 
140. Xiang, R., et al., Isolation distance between municipal solid waste landfills and drinking water 
wells for bacteria attenuation and safe drinking. Scientific Reports, 2019. 9(1): p. 1-11. 
141. Diggles, B., Survey for WSSV vectors in the Moreton Bay White Spot Biosecurity Area. 2020. 
142. Scott-Orr, H., B. Jones, and N. Bhatia, Uncooked prawn imports: effectiveness of biosecurity 
controls. 2017. 
143. Anderson, AZA Giant Pacific Octopus (Enteroctopus dofleini) Care Manual. Associaton of Zoos 
and Aquariums, 2014. 
144. Carl, AZA Japanese Spider Crab (Inachidae/Macrocheira) Care Manual. Association of Zoos 
and Aquariums, 2015. 
145. Casson, AZA Sea Otter (Enhydra lutris) Care Manual. Associaton of Zoos and Aquariums, 2018. 
146. Richman, L.K., et al. A newly recognized fatal baculovirus infection in freshwater crayfish. in 
Proceedings of the American Association of Zoo Veterinarians. 1997. 
147. Wildlife, T.P.a. Fishing with Bait Shrimp. Available from: 
https://tpwd.texas.gov/fishboat/fish/recreational/baitshrimp.phtml#2. 
148. DiStefano, R.J., M.E. Litvan, and P.T. Horner, The bait industry as a potential vector for alien 
cray
Text Len: 1241
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Bait Shrimp. Available from: 
https://tpwd.texas.gov/fishboat/fish/recreational/baitshrimp.phtml#2. 
148. DiStefano, R.J., M.E. Litvan, and P.T. Horner, The bait industry as a potential vector for alien 
crayfish introductions: problem recognition by fisheries agencies and a Missouri evaluation. 
Fisheries, 2009. 34(12): p. 586-597. 
149. Lluch-Cota, S.E., et al., The Gulf of California: review of ecosystem status and sustainability 
challenges. Progress in oceanography, 2007. 73(1): p. 1-26. 
150. Lotz, J., Viruses, biosecurity and specific pathogen-free stocks in shrimp aquaculture. World 
journal of microbiology and biotechnology, 1997. 13(4): p. 405-413. 
151. Bouwmeester, M.M., et al., Collateral diseases: aquaculture impacts on wildlife infections. 
Journal of Applied Ecology, 2021. 58(3): p. 453-464. 
152. Moss, S.M., et al. Disease prevention strategies for penaeid shrimp culture. in Proceedings of the 
Thirty-second US Japan Symposium on Aquaculture. US-japan Coope rative Program in Natural 
Resources (UJNR). US Department of Commerce, NOAA, Silver Spring, MD, USA. 2003. 
153. Samocha, T.M., et al., Management strategies for production of the Atlantic white shrimp 
Penaeus setiferus as bait shrimp in outdoor ponds. Journal of the World Aquaculture Society, 
1998. 29(2): p. 211-220.
Text Len: 1312
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
JNR). US Department of Commerce, NOAA, Silver Spring, MD, USA. 2003. 
153. Samocha, T.M., et al., Management strategies for production of the Atlantic white shrimp 
Penaeus setiferus as bait shrimp in outdoor ponds. Journal of the World Aquaculture Society, 
1998. 29(2): p. 211-220. 
154. Treece, Whiteleg Shrimp Litpenaeus vannamei. 2014, Monteray Bay Aquarium Seafood Watch. 
155. Patoka, J., et al., Invasive aquatic pets: failed policies increase risks of harmful invasions. 
Biodiversity and Conservation, 2018. 27(11): p. 3037-3046. 
156. Food, U. and D. Administration, Strategic Partnership Program Agroterrorism (SPPA) Initiative: 
Final Summary Report, September 2005–September 2008. Silver Spring, MD, 2008: p. 6-7. 
157. USDA, A., Part II. 7 CFR Part 331 and 9 CFR Part 121 Agricultural Bioterrorism Protection Act 
of 2002; Possesion, use, and transfer of biological agents and toxins; final rule. Fed Register, 
2005. 70: p. 13241-13292. 
 
 
Text Len: 957
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
United States Department of Agriculture  
 
United States 
Department of 
Agriculture 
Animal and Plant 
Health Inspection 
Service 
Veterinary Services 
Strategy and Policy 
Center for 
Epidemiology and 
Animal Health 
October 2022 
Infectious Hypodermal and 
Hematopoietic Necrosis Virus 
(IHHNV) in the United States: 
Rapid Risk Assessment 

2 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
 
Background 
History  
Infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis (IHHNV) is a viral disease that has affected wild and 
cultured shrimp and prawn (collectively referred to in this document as “shrimp”) globally for 
approximately 40 years.[1] The virus was first identified following a high mortality disease outbreak in 
farmed Penaeus stylirostris (Pacific blue shrimp) in Hawaii in 1981. Diagnostic examination of P. 
Key Points 
• Infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV) is globally distributed in 
wild and cultured shrimp populations. Some affected countries are not World Organization 
for Animal Health (WOAH) affiliates, which may affect disease reporting. 
• IHHNV is present in wild shrimp populations in the coastal waters of South, Central, and 
North America and in the Caribbean Ocean. 
• Potentially susceptible wild and introduced penaeid shrimp, other crustaceans, bivalves, 
and fish are present in U.S. coastal waters. Susceptibility studies have not been conducted 
for many species. 
• Infected shrimp may appear clinically healthy and remain infected for life. 
• There are no Federal regulations requiring
Text Len: 1558
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 the Caribbean Ocean. 
• Potentially susceptible wild and introduced penaeid shrimp, other crustaceans, bivalves, 
and fish are present in U.S. coastal waters. Susceptibility studies have not been conducted 
for many species. 
• Infected shrimp may appear clinically healthy and remain infected for life. 
• There are no Federal regulations requiring documentation of the health of shrimp prior to 
importation. Some States do require health certification prior to entry. 
• The United States has reported previous detections of IHHNV to WOAH. These detections 
resulted in serious consequences domestically and relative to international trade. If a large-
scale outbreak occurred, it is plausible that significant economic and export trade 
consequences could occur. 
• There is no national surveillance plan for IHHNV. Some States may require testing prior to 
entry. 
• Plausible pathways of entry for IHHNV include: 
o Ballast water and ship fouling  
o Movement of IHHNV in water  
o Importation of live shrimp  
o Importation of commodity shrimp products  
o Importation of bait shrimp  
• Plausible pathways of exposure for wild and farmed shrimp include: 
o Documented domestic exposure pathways  
 Introduction of imported IHHNV-infected shrimp into aquaculture facilities  
 Transfer of IHHNV-infected shrimp between aquaculture facilities 
o Commodity shrimp processing and waste disposition systems  
o Use of commodity shrimp as bait or food for aquatic animals  
o Use of imported bait shrimp for fishing  
o Movement or presence of IHHNV in water  
• Data, surveillance, and resource gaps diminish capability to fully assess the plausibility of 
all identified pathways. 
o
Text Len: 1690
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
o Commodity shrimp processing and waste disposition systems  
o Use of commodity shrimp as bait or food for aquatic animals  
o Use of imported bait shrimp for fishing  
o Movement or presence of IHHNV in water  
• Data, surveillance, and resource gaps diminish capability to fully assess the plausibility of 
all identified pathways. 
o These gaps will affect capability to develop additional risk assessments or risk 
analyses products. 
o Development of a domestic response plan may be affected. 
 
3 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
monodon (black tiger shrimp) and P. vannamei (whiteleg shrimp) from the same aquaculture system 
identified subclinical infection. From January 2019 through January 2020, IHHNV was among the 
diseases with the highest number of immediate notifications submitted to the World Organisation for 
Animal Health (WOAH) worldwide.[2]  
Distribution  
IHHNV has been identified in cultured shrimp populations worldwide including, but not limited to, 
Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Cambodia, China, Columbia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, 
French Polynesia, Guam, Guatemala, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Japan, Madagascar, Malaysia, 
Mexico, Mozambique, New Caledonia, Nicaragua, Papua New Guinea, Panama, Peru, the Philippines, 
Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Tanzania, Thailand, the United States, Venezuela, and 
Vietnam.[1, 3-5] Countries with WOAH s tatus include Australia, Brazil, Cambodia, China, Costa Rica, 
Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Madagascar, Mexico, Nicaragua, 
Papua New Guinea, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Thailand (
Text Len: 1647
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 United States, Venezuela, and 
Vietnam.[1, 3-5] Countries with WOAH s tatus include Australia, Brazil, Cambodia, China, Costa Rica, 
Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Madagascar, Mexico, Nicaragua, 
Papua New Guinea, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Thailand (Table 1).[6, 7] 
Table
 1.  Countries with an WOAH IHHNV status [6] 
Infection has been reported in wild penaeid shrimp populations in Australia, the Indo-Pacific region, 
and in the coastal waters of Mexico, Central America, and South America (Table 2).[3-5] In 1986 
IHHNV was documented in wild shrimp populations in the Gulf of California (GoC), Mexico. From 2004 
to 2005, IHHVN was detected at Bahia Magdalena on the Pacific coast of the Baja Peninsula (e.g., 
California Baja Sur; approximately 389 kilometers/640 miles south of the U.S. border) [5, 8-12]. IHHNV 
4 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
is reported as widely distributed among wild shrimp populations on the Pacific (including El Salvador, 
Guatemala, Nicaragua, and Panama) and Caribbean coasts of Central America (Panama and 
Honduras).[12-16] The virus has also been reported present in wild shrimp populations in coastal 
waters of South America. On the Pacific side of the continent, positive detections have been reported 
along the coasts of Peru and Ecuador. [12, 15, 17 -19]. Affected countries on the Atlantic side include 
Argentina, Brazil, and Columbia.[20, 21] IHHNV has been reported as widely distributed in cultured 
shrimp in the Caribbean.[16
Text Len: 1540
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 of South America. On the Pacific side of the continent, positive detections have been reported 
along the coasts of Peru and Ecuador. [12, 15, 17 -19]. Affected countries on the Atlantic side include 
Argentina, Brazil, and Columbia.[20, 21] IHHNV has been reported as widely distributed in cultured 
shrimp in the Caribbean.[16] Review of the literature did not identify any  publications reporting 
presence of this virus in wild Caribbean shrimp populations. 
Table 2. North, Central and South American countries with reported IHHNV presence in farmed 
and wild shrimp populations [3-5, 8-19 ] 
Prior to 2019, IHHNV had not been reported in U.S. farmed shrimp since 1993.[22] From January 1, 
2019, 
through January 8, 2020, the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom reported IHHNV 
infections in cultured shrimp to WOAH via immediate notifications. The United States reported two 
disease events. The first event in March 2019 was a recurrence of IHHNV infection in farmed P. 
vannamei in New Mexico followed by transfer of infected shrimp to a facility in California.[2, 23] The 
second event, in May 2019, was detected via routine surveillance sampling and was the first reported 
occurrence of IHHNV in Texas and Florida aquaculture facilities.[2, 23] In both events, control measures 
included quarantine of affected facilities and depopulation of affected tanks. In June 2019, Canada 
reported a first occurrence in four of the country’s five premises that culture P. vannamei. These facilities 
became infected via post-larval shrimp imported from a common source.[2, 23] The third disease event, 
involving two sites, was
Text Len: 1641
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
cluded quarantine of affected facilities and depopulation of affected tanks. In June 2019, Canada 
reported a first occurrence in four of the country’s five premises that culture P. vannamei. These facilities 
became infected via post-larval shrimp imported from a common source.[2, 23] The third disease event, 
involving two sites, was reported by the United Kingdom in July 2019. The first site, an experimental 
facility, imported live animals that developed high mortality after import. The second site, an aquaculture 
facility, imported post-larval shrimp designated as specific pathogen free. These shrimp exhibited no 
clinical signs of disease, but the United Kingdom Competent Authority opened a disease investigation 
after it was reported that one of the exporting suppliers had become positive for IHHNV.[2, 23] 
5 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Current Regulations 
IHHNV has been a WOAH listed notifiable pathogen since 1995.[7] 
 
IHHNV is listed as a reportable Foreign Animal Disease (FAD) on the United States National Animal 
Health Reporting System (NAHRS) Reportable Diseases, Infections, and Infestations List and the 
USDA-APHIS National Veterinary Accreditation Program (NVAP) Notifiable Diseases and Conditions 
website [24]. Suspect cases must be reported to State animal health officials. There are no Federal 
regulations requiring documentation of the health of shrimp prior to importation into the United States. 
Imported animals are not quarantined at ports of entry prior to distribution within the United States. 
There is currently no national surveillance plan for IHHNV. Some States require health certification 
prior to entry for imported and domestic crustacean species.  
Management of ballast water discharge
Text Len: 1771
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 documentation of the health of shrimp prior to importation into the United States. 
Imported animals are not quarantined at ports of entry prior to distribution within the United States. 
There is currently no national surveillance plan for IHHNV. Some States require health certification 
prior to entry for imported and domestic crustacean species.  
Management of ballast water discharge via ballast water treatment and exchange (BWTE) is regulated 
federally by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG), and at the 
State level. Ballast water discharges are required to meet International Maritime Organization (IMO) 
ballast water management convention D-2 standards for allowable concentrations of living organisms 
and microorganisms considered “indicators problematic for ballast water.”[25-28] Such microorganisms 
include human enteric pathogens; however, aquatic animal pathogens are not included. The efficacy of 
BWTE is estimated to range from 50 percent to 90 percent and may not treat microorganisms found in 
biofilms or sediments in ballast tanks.[29-31] Data on the efficacy of BWTE on viruses are lacking. 
Published literature suggests that a) testing for viruses may not occur; and b) using BWTE may 
decrease the concentration of viruses present in ballast water below the detection limits of available 
assays currently used to evaluate treatment methods.[29-31] Some vessels are not required to install a 
Ballast Water Treatment System (BWTS), including those that do not discharge ballast water, or 
discharge only to shoreside facilities or to water that presents little threat (e.g., public drinking water). 
Vessels operating in only one Captain of the Port (COPT) Zone are exempted from ballast water 
ex
Text Len: 1771
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 not required to install a 
Ballast Water Treatment System (BWTS), including those that do not discharge ballast water, or 
discharge only to shoreside facilities or to water that presents little threat (e.g., public drinking water). 
Vessels operating in only one Captain of the Port (COPT) Zone are exempted from ballast water 
exchange reporting and recordkeeping requirements.[26, 27, 29, 31] COPT zones are administrative, 
are not established using ecological or biological bases, and may not be appropriate boundaries for 
addressing invasive species. [31]  
Processing plant effluent and wastewater discharges are regulated under the Clean Water Act (CWA) 
and the EPA Seafood Processing Effluent Guidelines and Standards (a.k.a., Canned and Preserved 
Seafood Category; 40 CFR 408).[32-35] Some States require a National Pollutant  Discharge 
Elimination System (NPDES) permit if effluents are discharged into municipal storm sewer systems. 
However, such permitting is not required if effluent is discharged into a municipal sanitary sewer 
system.[34, 36] Processing effluents and wastewater are discharged to public water treatment works, 
municipal storm sewer systems, municipal sanitary sewers, or natural water bodies. Wastewater and 
effluents that enter public water treatment works or municipal sanitary sewer systems are treated prior 
to final discharge into natural water bodies. Wastewater and effluents that enter storm sewer systems 
are not treated prior to discharge into natural water systems. Wastewater disinfection and treatment 
requirements state that treatment must be sufficient to prevent contamination or damage to public 
water works or natural water bodies. However, requirements depend on the size of the processing 
facility (i.e., small processing plants
Text Len: 1796
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 bodies. Wastewater and effluents that enter storm sewer systems 
are not treated prior to discharge into natural water systems. Wastewater disinfection and treatment 
requirements state that treatment must be sufficient to prevent contamination or damage to public 
water works or natural water bodies. However, requirements depend on the size of the processing 
facility (i.e., small processing plants and farms may be exempt from some regulations). Processing 
facilities are required to monitor and sample wastewater discharges and notify the EPA and State 
6 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
regulatory agencies of the results. However, regular monitoring may not occur and violations have 
been reported.[34]  
The U.S. aquaculture industry is regulated by Federal, State, and local laws. Types of permits typically 
issued for aquaculture include siting and discharge permits. Siting permits are governed by Section 
404 of the CWA and control the siting, number, and size of shrimp farms; establish requirements that 
must be met; regulate discharge of dredged or fill material into the nation’s waters; and prevent the 
degradation of national waters and wetlands. The United States Army Corps of Engineers administers 
Section 404 under the overview of the EPA, often cooperatively with State coastal zone management 
programs. [37] The United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) investigates potential fish and 
wildlife impacts. [38]  
The EPA is responsible for enforcing the CWA, which authorizes the NPDES permit program.[33, 36, 
38] States administer the NPDES permit program, which regulates concentrated aquatic animal 
production (CAAP) facilities (e.g., fish farm, hatchery, production, or other facility) that discharge 
pollutants into Federal waters.[34
Text Len: 1799
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The EPA is responsible for enforcing the CWA, which authorizes the NPDES permit program.[33, 36, 
38] States administer the NPDES permit program, which regulates concentrated aquatic animal 
production (CAAP) facilities (e.g., fish farm, hatchery, production, or other facility) that discharge 
pollutants into Federal waters.[34, 36] Permits and requirements are structured for each farm based on 
the characteristics of the water body that the farm is discharging effluent to; farm production; and levels 
of ammonia, dissolved oxygen, and total suspended solids present in the effluents.[38]  
CAAP facilities must a) meet permit requirements for ongoing monitoring metrics; b) keep records on 
animal numbers and weights, quantity of feeds, and frequency of cleaning, inspections, maintenance, 
and repairs; c) report failures or damage to containment systems; d) report use of experimental animal 
drugs and drugs not used according to label requirements; e) minimize discharges of excess feed; f) 
prevent discharge of drugs and pesticides that have been spilled; g) regularly maintain production and 
wastewater treatment systems; g) minimize solid waste discharges (e.g., uneaten feed, settled solids, 
animal carcasses) if they are facilities with flow-through and recirculating discharge systems; h) 
adequately train staff to properly operate and maintain production and wastewater treatment systems 
and to prevent and respond to spills; and i) develop, maintain, and certify a Best Management Practice 
(BMP) plan.[38] A BMP describes how the aquaculture production facilities will meet the set 
requirements and guidelines. Some States may develop or enact State-specific BMPs.[38-40] Aquatic 
animal production facilities producing less than 45,359
Text Len: 1764
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and respond to spills; and i) develop, maintain, and certify a Best Management Practice 
(BMP) plan.[38] A BMP describes how the aquaculture production facilities will meet the set 
requirements and guidelines. Some States may develop or enact State-specific BMPs.[38-40] Aquatic 
animal production facilities producing less than 45,359 kg/100,000 lbs annually are not subject to 
CAAP effluent guidelines but may still be required to have NPDES permits. 
States are mandated under the CWA to designate specific uses of water bodies and assign site-
specific water quality standards.[37, 38] State aquaculture regulations are not standardized; regulations 
may vary by location (e.g., coastal, inland, wetland) and type of operation, and may include oversight of 
aquaculture facility design, control measures to prevent escape of all shrimp life stages at all 
water/effluent discharge points, effluent treatment and discharge, species certification relative to wildlife 
management and disease freedom status, and water use.[38, 41] States may conduct unannounced 
BMP inspections annually or as needed, and variably regulate and monitor biosecurity and disease 
prevention measures to prevent potential release of aquatic pathogens into approximate natural water 
bodies.[38] State coastal management guidelines must follow or may be more restrictive than those 
described in the Coastal Zone Management Act.[42]  
7 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
States variably require written authorization, an import permit, or a certificate of health from the State 
Veterinarian prior to interstate import of shrimp. Health requirements for shrimp prior to international 
import or export also vary by state. Best Management Practice guidelines that summarize federal and 
state regulations relative to shrimp culture, containment, water treatment, health and biose
Text Len: 1878
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
 
States variably require written authorization, an import permit, or a certificate of health from the State 
Veterinarian prior to interstate import of shrimp. Health requirements for shrimp prior to international 
import or export also vary by state. Best Management Practice guidelines that summarize federal and 
state regulations relative to shrimp culture, containment, water treatment, health and biosecurity may 
be available in some States.   
Hazard Identification 
A hazard, as defined by WOAH, is a chemical, physical, or biological agent, or condition of an animal or 
animal product, with potential to cause an adverse health event. [43]  
IHHNV is a linear, single-stranded, non-enveloped DNA parvovirus also known as Penaeus stylirostris 
densovirus (PstDNV).[1] In July 2019, the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) 
proposed classification of IHHNV as decapod penstyldensovirus 1 (Parvoviridae; 
Penstyldensovirus, Hamaparvovirinae) .[1, 44] Genbank contains approximately 50 IHHNV genomes, 
many of which are incomplete.[45] Lack of complete genomic information limits capability to fully 
assess phylogenetic relatedness and virus transmission characteristics of the virus.[46] To date, 
genetic analyses have identified high rates of genetic variation, nucleotide substitutions and clustering 
among identified strains.[46-51] 
Three infectious IHHNV lineages (Types I, II and III) and two non-infectious types (A and B) have been 
described in the literature.[46, 47, 51, 52] Type I and II have a global distribution. Type I IHHNV 
isol
Text Len: 1580
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 nucleotide substitutions and clustering 
among identified strains.[46-51] 
Three infectious IHHNV lineages (Types I, II and III) and two non-infectious types (A and B) have been 
described in the literature.[46, 47, 51, 52] Type I and II have a global distribution. Type I IHHNV 
isolates are known to infect Peneaus monodon and P. vannamei shrimp.[46] Type II isolates have 
been identified in infected P. monodon, P. stylirostris, and P. vannamei.[46, 51] Type II strains 
detected in the United States (Florida and Texas) in 2019 and 2020 were phylogenetically related to a 
Type II strain found in South America (Ecuador).[46] Type III strains infect (enters, survives and 
multiplies in the host) and become integrated into the genome of P. monodon, but are not infectious 
(transmitted to other hosts).[46] Non-infectious Type A and B IHHNV are inherited, noninfectious, 
endogenous viral elements (EVE) present in the genomes of P. monodon and P. vannamei. These 
EVE sequences contain incomplete IHHNV genome sequences and are randomly inserted into the 
chromosomal DNA of affected shrimp.[7, 46, 50, 51, 53] Shrimp may carry one or both types.[47, 53] 
EVE sequences are present in the germline, and are passed from adults to offspring. 
The function of EVE sequences is not fully understood. It is hypothesized that EVE sequences evolved 
in response to chronic or persistent IHHNV infection.[48, 50, 51] Some authors state that EVE 
sequences appear to lower susceptibility to IHHNV infection via viral accommodation and 
Text Len: 1534
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

EVE sequences are present in the germline, and are passed from adults to offspring. 
The function of EVE sequences is not fully understood. It is hypothesized that EVE sequences evolved 
in response to chronic or persistent IHHNV infection.[48, 50, 51] Some authors state that EVE 
sequences appear to lower susceptibility to IHHNV infection via viral accommodation and 
tolerance.[51, 54] Other authors suggest that some EVE sequences may not be fully protective, and 
that co-presence of EVE sequences and IHHNV virus in shrimp could result in recombination events 
leading to return to virulence or evolution of new IHHNV strains.[51, 54]  
Viral accommodation is described as a naturally occurring autonomous genetic modification process. It 
is hypothesized to be an evolutionary strategy for heritable immunity via the EVE sequences present in 
adult shrimp and passed on in germ cells.[50] The resultant immunity is thought to occur by interfering 
with infectious IHHNV virus replication. Affected shrimp persistently harbor the IHHNV virus but do not 
8 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
develop clinical signs of disease.[51] Experimental studies have demonstrated that presence of EVE 
sequences results in significant reduction of IHHNV viral replication. Shrimp maintained viral loads of 
varying intensity but remained free of clinical signs.[50] It should be noted that these studies did not 
meet WOAH criteria for natural infection.[55]  
Tolerance (resistance), which is described as a diminished response to IHHNV infection, has been 
described in some shrimp species. For example, a genetic line of P. stylirostris (“Super Shrimp”) 
developed in the 1990s was reported to be IHHNV resistant at the conclusion of a 32-day experimental 
chall
Text Len: 1777
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
Tolerance (resistance), which is described as a diminished response to IHHNV infection, has been 
described in some shrimp species. For example, a genetic line of P. stylirostris (“Super Shrimp”) 
developed in the 1990s was reported to be IHHNV resistant at the conclusion of a 32-day experimental 
challenge study, and P. vannamei farmed in Latin America and Asia are reportedly tolerant to 
IHHNV.[7, 46] Farmed IHHNV tolerant shrimp are described as exhibiting no clinical signs of disease 
despite detectable presence of virulent IHHNV in individual animals.[7, 46] In field studies in IHHNV-
endemic regions of Ecuador, in-pond prevalence rates of IHHNV in apparently healthy IHHNV tolerant 
P. monodon, P. stylirostris and P. vannamei ranged from 3.3 to 100 percent.[7] Shrimp exhibited no 
clinical signs of disease despite viral load (virus copies/ng DNA) ranging from low (zero) to high (2.9 x 
105) in individual animals.[7] Some published literature state that viral load does not affect individual 
shrimp weight or other production parameters. Other reports state that histological evidence of infection 
and decreased body weight can occur when viral loads are high.[7, 56] In several experimental 
challenge studies, IHHNV tolerant/resistant specific pathogen free (SPF) P. monodon, P. stylirostris 
and P. vannamei had high detectable viral loads post-challenge, but did not exhibit clinical signs of 
disease. Species differences in viral load (P. vannamei > P. monodon > P. stylirostris) were noted in 
one study.[
Text Len: 1534
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 (SPF) P. monodon, P. stylirostris 
and P. vannamei had high detectable viral loads post-challenge, but did not exhibit clinical signs of 
disease. Species differences in viral load (P. vannamei > P. monodon > P. stylirostris) were noted in 
one study.[46] Mortality rates were low (< 3 percent) among challenged treatment groups. The 
challenge method used in these studies did not meet WOAH criteria for natural exposure.[55]   
Many aspects related to the epidemiology of IHHNV are still unclear due to lack of research on the 
pathogenicity, genetics and other factors associated with the virus.[50] Recently published research 
suggests that prevalence and virus detection rates, and presence of clinical signs, morbidity, and 
mortality rates are highly variable and may be influenced by shrimp species, age, genetics and health 
status; virus genetics; the presence of EVE sequences; virus genetics; laboratory diagnostic testing 
modalities; farm husbandry and biosecurity practices; and unknown factors.[7]  
Transmission 
Horizontal transmission appears to occur via direct contact with contaminated water and infected 
shrimp, and orally via ingestion of infected shrimp tissues and organic matter. Shrimp tissues 
containing homologous EVE sequences do not appear to be infectious to P. vannamei and P. 
monodon. Vertical transmission occurs in infected females, leading to production of eggs with poor 
hatchability, leading to poor development and survival of larvae and post-larvae. While data are limited 
on stability of the virus outside of the host in natural environments, reports of transmission via organic 
matter and contaminated water support the plausibility of environmental persistence. Vector 
transmission is unknown. 
Clinical
Text Len: 1757
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 infected females, leading to production of eggs with poor 
hatchability, leading to poor development and survival of larvae and post-larvae. While data are limited 
on stability of the virus outside of the host in natural environments, reports of transmission via organic 
matter and contaminated water support the plausibility of environmental persistence. Vector 
transmission is unknown. 
Clinical Signs and Pathogenicity 
IHHNV infection manifests as acute or chronic disease. Response to infection is variable and is 
affected by multiple host characteristics (e.g., age, body size, gender, genetics, nutritional status, 
species) and external conditions (e.g., environment, population density, stress). Chronically infected 
animals retain viable virus in tissues for life.   
9 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Acute disease is typically seen in P. stylirostris, although there are published reports of acute disease 
occurrence in Machrobrachium rosenbergii as well.[50, 57] Clinical signs are most often observed in 
post-larvae and juvenile shrimp and include noticeable decrease in food consumption; lethargic 
swimming or motionlessness at the water surface followed by rolling over and sinking; motionlessness 
at the bottom of the tank/pond prior to mortality; pale musculature; bluish color; and white to buff-
colored mottling on the cuticular epidermis, especially at the junction of the tergal plates. Mortality rates 
may be greatest (up to 90 percent) in small shrimp (5.0 mg – 3.7 gm body weight). Chronic infection 
commonly occurs in P. vannamei and P. monodon but has been reported in P. stylirostris and M. 
rosenbergii.[50, 57] Clinical signs include
Text Len: 1694
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
gal plates. Mortality rates 
may be greatest (up to 90 percent) in small shrimp (5.0 mg – 3.7 gm body weight). Chronic infection 
commonly occurs in P. vannamei and P. monodon but has been reported in P. stylirostris and M. 
rosenbergii.[50, 57] Clinical signs include deformed rostrum (bent 45o to 90o left or right); sixth 
abdominal segment deformity; wrinkled antennae; cuticular roughness; “bubble head” appearance; 
runting; and disparate growth rates (Runt Deformity Syndrome; RDS). Cuticular deformities are 
considered pathognomonic when present in some shrimp species.  
Disease in P . stylirostris: Clinical disease is affected by the transmission pathway and the age, body 
weight, and size of affected shrimp. Vertically infected larvae and post-larvae often appear healthy until 
approximately 35 days of age when clinical signs appear, followed approximately 14 days later by high 
mortality (50 percent to 90 percent). Clinical disease in horizontally infected shrimp is age and body 
size dependent. Acute disease with clinical signs and high mortality occurs in juvenile and sub-adult 
shrimp, while adult shrimp and individuals of greater body weight exhibit less severe disease. Shrimp 
surviving disease remain infected and are transmission capable. RDS has also been documented. 
Disease in P . vannamei: This species shows relative resistance to IHHNV infection; however, 
asymptomatic infection has been detected in all life stages including eggs.[7] Vertical transmission 
results in reduced egg production, reduced egg hatchability, and high prevalence of infection in 
nauplii (first larval stage). Juvenile shrimp develop RDS
Text Len: 1653
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ase in P . vannamei: This species shows relative resistance to IHHNV infection; however, 
asymptomatic infection has been detected in all life stages including eggs.[7] Vertical transmission 
results in reduced egg production, reduced egg hatchability, and high prevalence of infection in 
nauplii (first larval stage). Juvenile shrimp develop RDS. Horizontally infected juvenile shrimp may 
develop RDS, while adult shrimp rarely demonstrate clinical signs. Juvenile shrimp surviving to 
adulthood and infected adults remain infected for life. P. vannamei containing EVE sequences have 
been reported, and do not appear capable of producing infectious virions or of horizontal IHHNV 
transmission to susceptible hosts.[7] 
Disease in P. monodon: IHHNV infection rarely causes disease in P. monodon; however, RDS has 
been reported.[46, 56] Shrimp remain infected for life. Sellars et al., 2019 reported reduced 
performance (growth, general health, and survival) in asymptomatically infected P. monodon in farm 
ponds and experimentally simulated farm environments when high viral loads were present in affected 
animals.[56] P. monodon containing integrated IHHNV EVE sequences have been reported. Such 
shrimp do not appear capable of producing infectious IHHNV virions or of horizontal IHHNV 
transmission to susceptible hosts.[7]  
Asymptomatic carriers of IHHNV: Asymptomatic IHHNV has been reported in M. rosenbergii, P. 
monodon and P. vannamei.[1] Mechanisms by which these species function as asymptomatic carriers 
may include presence of EVE sequences, accommodation and tolerance as described above. 
Asymptomatic carriers exhibit no clinical signs but
Text Len: 1665
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 of IHHNV: Asymptomatic IHHNV has been reported in M. rosenbergii, P. 
monodon and P. vannamei.[1] Mechanisms by which these species function as asymptomatic carriers 
may include presence of EVE sequences, accommodation and tolerance as described above. 
Asymptomatic carriers exhibit no clinical signs but may be capable of transmitting virus to susceptible 
shrimp.[50] A negative trend between IHHNV viral load present in ponds containing asymptomatic 
shrimp and performance (growth, general health, and survival) has been reported in the literature.[7, 
46, 56] 
10 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Affected Species 
Table 3 summarizes the shrimp species meeting WOAH criteria for listing as susceptible to IHHNV 
(e.g., P. californiensis, P. monodon, P. setiferus, P. stylirostris, P. vannamei) and other crustacean, bi-
valve, and fish species in which IHHNV presence has been detected or infection experimentally 
induced. The epidemiological significance of detection and/or experimental infection in non-shrimp 
species has not yet been determined. 
 
Table 3. Aquatic animal species meeting WOAH criteria for listing as susceptible to IHHNV, or 
with reported, confirmed, or suspected IHHNV detection based on review of the literature.[1, 14, 
16, 20, 57-66] 
Group Genus species Common name 
Shrimp/Crayfish Artemesia longinaris c Argentine stiletto shrimp 
 Farfantepenaeus duorarum  Northern pink shrimp 
 Palaemon macrodactylus  Oriental shrimp 

Text Len: 1479
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 on review of the literature.[1, 14, 
16, 20, 57-66] 
Group Genus species Common name 
Shrimp/Crayfish Artemesia longinaris c Argentine stiletto shrimp 
 Farfantepenaeus duorarum  Northern pink shrimp 
 Palaemon macrodactylus  Oriental shrimp 
 Macrobrachium rosenbergii c Giant river prawn 
 Penaeus aztecus b Northern brown shrimp 
 Penaeus californiensis a Yellowleg shrimp 
 Penaeus chinensis (P. orientalis) Chinese fleshy prawn 
 Penaeus duorarum c Northern pink shrimp 
 Penaeus indicus  Indian prawn 
 Penaeus japonicus c Kuruma prawn; Japanese tiger prawn 
 Penaeus latisulcatus  Western king prawn 
 Penaeus merguiensis Banana shrimp 
 Penaeus monodon a Black tiger prawn  
 Penaeus monodon x Penaeus 
esculentus hybrid Tiger prawn hybrid 
 Penaeus occidentalis c Western white shrimp 
 Penaeus schmitti  Southern white shrimp 
 Penaeus semisulcatus  c Green tiger prawn 
 Penaeus setiferus a Atlantic white shrimp  
 Penaeus stylirostrisa Western blue shrimp  
 Penaeus subtilis  
(Farfantepenaeus subtilis)  Brown shrimp 
 Penaeus vannamei a Whiteleg shrimp  
 Procambarus clarkii  Louisiana red crayfish 
Crab Callinectes arcuatus c Arched swimming crab 
 Chionoecetes angulatus  Triangle tanner crab 
 Hemigraspus penicillatus c Hairy-clawed shore crab 
 Neohelice granulate
Text Len: 1288
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 vannamei a Whiteleg shrimp  
 Procambarus clarkii  Louisiana red crayfish 
Crab Callinectes arcuatus c Arched swimming crab 
 Chionoecetes angulatus  Triangle tanner crab 
 Hemigraspus penicillatus c Hairy-clawed shore crab 
 Neohelice granulate  Tropical crab 
Bi-valve shellfish Mactra chinesis Chinese trough clam, Sunray surf 
clam 
 Mactra veneriformis Intertidal clam 
11 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Group Genus species Common name 
 Meretrix meretrix Asiatic hard clam 
 Mytilus edulis Atlantic blue mussel 
 Ruditapes philippinarum  Manila clam, Japanese littleneck clam 
 Sinonvacula constricta Chinese razor clam 
 Tegillarca granosa Ark clam, blood cockle, blood clam 
Fish Achirus mazatlanus c Mazatlan sole 
 Gerres cinereus c Yellowfin mojarra 
 Oreochromis spp. c Tilapia spp. 
 Lile stolifera c Pacific piquitinga 
 Centropomus medius c Blackfin snook 
aFulfills the criteria for listing as susceptible to infection according to the WOAH Aquatic Animal Health 
Code, Chapter 1.5    
bSpecies for which there is incomplete evidence to fulfill the criteria for listing as susceptible  
cSpecies for which there is no evidence for infection, but have had positive PCR results 
 
Farmed shrimp reared in the United States that are susceptible to IHHNV include P. vannamei, P. 
monodon, and P.
Text Len: 1327
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   
bSpecies for which there is incomplete evidence to fulfill the criteria for listing as susceptible  
cSpecies for which there is no evidence for infection, but have had positive PCR results 
 
Farmed shrimp reared in the United States that are susceptible to IHHNV include P. vannamei, P. 
monodon, and P. stylirostris.[38] Potentially susceptible indigenous wild and introduced penaeid shrimp 
populations and other indigenous and wild crustaceans, bi-valves, and fish species are found along the 
Atlantic, Gulf, and Pacific coasts of the continental United States, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and U.S. Virgin 
Islands (Table 4).  
 
Table 4. Indigenous and introduced aquatic animals that are susceptible or potentially 
susceptible to IHHNV infection, based on literature review.[67-88] 
Genus species Common name Location Indigenous/Introduced 
Farfantepenaeus 
duorarum  Northern pink shrimp East Coast: Maryland to Florida; 
Gulf of Mexico: Florida to Texas Indigenous 
Macrobrachium 
rosenbergii  Giant river prawn 
Gulf of Mexico:  possible 
established population in 
Mississippi 
Introduced 
Palaemon 
macrodactylus  Oriental shrimp 
East Coast: Northwest Atlantic 
Ocean; West Coast: Oregon to 
California   
Introduced 
Penaeus aztecus Northern brown shrimp 
East Coast:  Massachusetts to 
Florida; Gulf of Mexico: Florida 
to Texas 
Indigenous 
Penaeus californiensis  
Yellowleg shrimp 
(Farfantepenaeus 
californiensis) 
West Coast: San Francisco 
Bay, California
Text Len: 1476
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Introduced 
Penaeus aztecus Northern brown shrimp 
East Coast:  Massachusetts to 
Florida; Gulf of Mexico: Florida 
to Texas 
Indigenous 
Penaeus californiensis  
Yellowleg shrimp 
(Farfantepenaeus 
californiensis) 
West Coast: San Francisco 
Bay, California to Chile Indigenous 
Penaeus duorarum  
Northern pink shrimp 
(Farfantepenaeus 
duorarum) 
East Coast: Chesapeake Bay, 
Maryland to the Florida Keys; 
Gulf of Mexico: Florida to Texas 
Indigenous 
12 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Genus species Common name Location Indigenous/Introduced 
Penaeus monodon Black tiger prawn  
East Coast: North Carolina to 
Florida; Gulf of Mexico: Florida 
to Texas 
Introduced 
Penaeus schmitti  
Western Atlantic Ocean: 
Greater Antilles, Cuba, Virgin 
Islands 
Indigenous 
Penaeus setiferus Atlantic white shrimp  
East Coast: New York to 
Florida; Gulf of Mexico: present 
throughout  
Indigenous 
Penaeus vannamei Pacific whiteleg shrimp 
Accidental aquaculture releases 
in Hawaii, Texas, South 
Carolina Puerto Rico; no 
evidence of established 
populations 
Introduced 
Procambarus clarkii Louisiana red crayfish 
Gulf coastal plain from the 
Florida panhandle to Mexico; 
southern Mississippi River 
drainage to Illinois  
Indigenous 
Callinectes arcuatus Arched swimming crab 
West Coast: Los Angeles, 
California to Peru and northern 

Text Len: 1357
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Introduced 
Procambarus clarkii Louisiana red crayfish 
Gulf coastal plain from the 
Florida panhandle to Mexico; 
southern Mississippi River 
drainage to Illinois  
Indigenous 
Callinectes arcuatus Arched swimming crab 
West Coast: Los Angeles, 
California to Peru and northern 
Chile 
Indigenous 
Chionoecetes 
angulatus  Triangle tanner crab 
West Coast: Aleutian Islands, 
Bering Sea, British Columbia to 
the continental slope of 
California 
Indigenous 
Mytilus edulis  Atlantic blue mussel East Coast: Canada to North 
Carolina; West Coast: California Indigenous, Introduced 
Ruditapes 
philippinarum  
Manila clam, Japanese 
littleneck clam 
West Coast: British Columbia to 
California; Hawaii Introduced 
Gerres cinereus  Yellowfin mojarra Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean 
Ocean Indigenous 
Oreochromis spp. Tilapia spp. 
East Coast: North Carolina to 
Florida; Gulf of Mexico: Florida, 
Alabama, Texas; Puerto Rico 
Introduced 
 
Diagnostic Testing 
IHHNV has affinity for tissues of ectodermal and mesodermal origin (gills, cuticular epithelium, 
hypodermis, connective tissues, hematopoietic tissues, lymphoid organs, antennal glands, and neural 
tissues) and may have affinity for the hepatopancreas of M. rosenbergii. Tissues suitable for diagnostic 
testing include pooled small life stage shrimp (post-larvae or animals < 0.5 gm), individual large shrimp, 
or target
Text Len: 1380
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, hematopoietic tissues, lymphoid organs, antennal glands, and neural 
tissues) and may have affinity for the hepatopancreas of M. rosenbergii. Tissues suitable for diagnostic 
testing include pooled small life stage shrimp (post-larvae or animals < 0.5 gm), individual large shrimp, 
or target tissues harvested from large shrimp (e.g., connective tissue, gills, hematopoietic nodules, 
hemocytes, ventral nerve cord and ganglia, antennal gland tubule epithelial cells, lymphoid organ 
13 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
parenchymal cells, hemolymph). Tissues that may be submitted for non-lethal surveillance testing 
include hemolymph and pleopods. Spawned eggs and larval shrimp are not suitable for disease testing 
or IHHNV disease freedom certification because viral loads may be below detection limits.[89]  
Recommendations regarding diagnostic test suitability for surveillance and diagnosis are described in 
the WOAH Manual of Diagnostic Tests for Aquatic Animals.[89]  Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is 
recommended for diagnosis of acute and chronic infections. Conventional PCR and TaqMan rtPCR 
assays can be used to detect and differentiate IHHVN virus from EVE sequences. Unexpected PCR 
results (positive or negative) should be confirmed with a different PCR primer set or another diagnostic 
test (e.g., genetic sequencing, histopathology, in situ hybridization assay of histological sections, 
molecular diagnostics, recombinase polymerase amplification assay, trans-electron microscopy). The 
WOAH Manual of Diagnostic Tests states that geographical IHHNV variants may not be detectable by 
all
Text Len: 1635
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 PCR primer set or another diagnostic 
test (e.g., genetic sequencing, histopathology, in situ hybridization assay of histological sections, 
molecular diagnostics, recombinase polymerase amplification assay, trans-electron microscopy). The 
WOAH Manual of Diagnostic Tests states that geographical IHHNV variants may not be detectable by 
all diagnostic modalities.[6] Attempts to culture IHHNV in vitro have not been successful. There are no 
serological assays. 
Histology is often used to detect IHHNV-specific Cowdry inclusion bodies, which are considered 
pathognomonic (indicative of a specific disease or condition) for IHHNV infection. Experimentally, 
histopathologic changes may be more prevalent in tissues collected from larger shrimp. Caro et al., 
2022 demonstrated that while Cowdry bodies were detectable in experimentally challenged P. 
monodon and P. vannamei, they were not reliably present in similarly challenged P. stylirostris.[7] The 
authors also noted that the presence of Cowdry bodies appeared to be influenced by the level of viral 
load in infected individuals (less likely to be present with low viral loads).[7]  
Molecular assays and genome sequencing should be used to confirm virulent IHHNV 
presence/absence and rule-out presence of known or novel EVE sequences  in P. monodon and P. 
vannamei.[46, 51, 53] According to the literature, presence of EVE sequences in the genome of some 
shrimp species may present challenges to molecular assays used for IHHNV surveillance and 
diagnostic testing. If diagnostic assays designed to detect virulent IHHNV genomic material also detect 
EVE sequences, non-IHHNV infected shrimp with EVE sequences in
Text Len: 1680
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
i.[46, 51, 53] According to the literature, presence of EVE sequences in the genome of some 
shrimp species may present challenges to molecular assays used for IHHNV surveillance and 
diagnostic testing. If diagnostic assays designed to detect virulent IHHNV genomic material also detect 
EVE sequences, non-IHHNV infected shrimp with EVE sequences in their genomes will test positive 
(false-positives).[51]  At present, some diagnostic assays recommended by WOAH for detection of 
infectious IHHNV may also detect EVE sequences present shrimp.[6, 51]  
Molecular assays designed to detect known EVE sequences are available. If these assays are used 
and no additional testing performed to detect virulent IHHNV genomic material, shrimp with EVE 
sequences may be identified as falsely positive for infectious IHHNV virus.[51] It is also plausible that 
assays designed to detect known EVE sequences could return false-negative results if shrimp have 
EVE sequences containing inverted, missing, reordered, repeated, or unique IHHNV genome 
fragments.[48, 53, 54, 58, 90] It may be advantageous for laboratories to utilize molecular assays 
capable of detecting both viral IHHNV and EVE sequence DNA. Other assays that could present 
options for distinguishing between infectious IHHNV and EVE sequences include clustered interspaced 
short palindromic repeats (CRISPER), digital droplet PCR, next-generation sequencing assays, protein 
modeling, and real-time PCR (rtPCR) employing fluorescent probes or SYBER Green dye amplicon 
detection methods.[46, 51, 53] This has been previously achieved using a series of seven overlapping 
primer sets to verify the presence of the whole IHHNV genome.[48] Taengcha
Text Len: 1708
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 PCR, next-generation sequencing assays, protein 
modeling, and real-time PCR (rtPCR) employing fluorescent probes or SYBER Green dye amplicon 
detection methods.[46, 51, 53] This has been previously achieved using a series of seven overlapping 
primer sets to verify the presence of the whole IHHNV genome.[48] Taengchaivaphum et al., 2022 
reported that using a “long-amp” PCR method covering 90 percent of the IHHNV genome 
14 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
(approximately 4000 base pairs) was effective in confirming the absence of IHHNV in a sample that 
had returned a positive PCR test result with the WOAH recommended testing method.[51] 
Treatment 
There is no treatment or vaccine available for IHHNV. Use of RNA interference gene silencing has 
been used experimentally; however, a delivery technology suitable for aquaculture use is not available. 
Eggs and larvae may be disinfected to reduce IHHNV contamination; however, this does not prevent 
vertical transmission.   
Disease Prevention and Control Measures  
Appropriate biosecurity practices and husbandry to prevent IHHNV introduction and spread should 
include a) international and domestic procurement of live shrimp and germplasm from IHHNV-free 
sources; b) quarantine of all new shrimp stocks upon arrival; c) appropriate disinfection and disposal of 
transport water; d) health and mortality monitoring of shrimp present on site; e) pre- and post-treatment 
of farm water sources; f) minimizing or eliminating water exchanges between populations; and g) 
appropriate sanitization of equipment and tanks.[2] The virus is temperature stable (-20 oC/-4 oF x 5 
Text Len: 1652
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 disinfection and disposal of 
transport water; d) health and mortality monitoring of shrimp present on site; e) pre- and post-treatment 
of farm water sources; f) minimizing or eliminating water exchanges between populations; and g) 
appropriate sanitization of equipment and tanks.[2] The virus is temperature stable (-20 oC/-4 oF x 5 
years) and will survive freeze/thaw cycles in shrimp tissues, clarified suspensions, and 50 percent 
glycerin. In experimentally infected live P. vannamei, increased viral titers (log102) were noted at lower 
temperatures (24 oC/75.2 oF, compared to 32 oC/ 89.6 oF).[6] 
Public Health 
IHHNV is not a zoonotic disease.   
Potential Entry Pathways  
The WOAH defines an entry pathway as any pathway that allows movement of a hazard from a point of 
origin (e.g., foreign country) to domestic points of entry.[43]  
Pathway 1:  Ballast water, ship fouling 
Ballast water and fouling present on the hulls of ships contain a variety of biological materials including 
animals (e.g., crustaceans, echinoderms, fish, mollusks, plankton), microorganisms (e.g., bacteria, 
viruses), and plants. Crustacean species can compose up to 50 percent of taxa fouling commercial and 
recreational ships and boats in fresh and marine water. Both ballast water and ship fouling have been 
associated with invasive aquatic animal and pathogen introductions in coastal and freshwater systems 
globally and in the United States.[29-31, 91, 92]  
 
Ballast water is to
Text Len: 1483
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 to 50 percent of taxa fouling commercial and 
recreational ships and boats in fresh and marine water. Both ballast water and ship fouling have been 
associated with invasive aquatic animal and pathogen introductions in coastal and freshwater systems 
globally and in the United States.[29-31, 91, 92]  
 
Ballast water is to be treated and exchanged in accordance with International, Federal, and State 
regulations and standards; however, BWTE reduces with variable efficacy, but does not eliminate, 
living organisms and microorganisms, and the efficacy of BWTE on viruses is generally unknown. 
Some ships are exempt from BWTE and recordkeeping requirements, or are allowed to discharge 
ballast water in COPT zones. COPT zones are administrative and do not consider ecological or 
biological factors that may permit movement of invasive microorganisms, organisms or plants out of the 
zone.  Regulatory non-compliance does occur, and has been reported.[93]  
Current regulations and standards do not list conditions for ballast water treatment, monitoring, or 
testing for aquatic pathogens, including IHHNV. A literature review did not identify surveillance data or 
15 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
studies monitoring ballast water or ship hull fouling for IHHNV presence/absence. The literature did not 
identify any reports definitively linking ballast water or ship fouling to introduction of IHHNV at a port of 
entry, coastal waterway, or aquaculture facility. This lack of data or reporting does not preclude the 
potential for ballast water or ship fouling to function as transboundary pathways of IHHNV introduction. 
Given the above information and previous documentation of invasive species and pathogen 
introductions, ballast water and ship fouling appear to be plausible trans
Text Len: 1816
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

entry, coastal waterway, or aquaculture facility. This lack of data or reporting does not preclude the 
potential for ballast water or ship fouling to function as transboundary pathways of IHHNV introduction. 
Given the above information and previous documentation of invasive species and pathogen 
introductions, ballast water and ship fouling appear to be plausible transboundary pathways of entry for 
IHHNV.  
 
Pathway 2:  Movement of infected shrimp, eggs, or IHHNV in water 
A comprehensive evaluation of IHHNV dispersal and movement in ocean currents is beyond the scope 
of this document. Briefly, movement of aquatic pathogens in ocean currents has been demonstrated 
and epidemiologically linked to disease introductions and outbreaks [94-96], and dispersals of invasive 
aquatic organisms and microorganisms from shipping ports (after introduction via Pathway 1) have 
been documented via ocean tides and currents.[94, 97] Oceanographic current systems in the GoC are 
considered factors affecting IHHVN distribution and prevalence among resident wild shrimp 
populations. Prevalence is highest in the northern zone, which is a semi-isolated oceanographic cell 
affected by a gyre (rotary pattern) that limits, but does not prevent, water-borne out-migration of 
infected shrimp and IHHNV.[10, 98] Lower prevalence rates in the central and southern zones appear 
related to ocean currents that reduce contact rates between infected shrimp and the concentration of 
IHHNV in the water column, allow water exchanges between the zones and the open ocean, and may 
have provided transmission routes to wild shrimp located along the west coast of the Baja California 
Sur (specifically Bahia Magdalena) and the south coast of Mexico.[9, 12, 99]  
Text Len: 1754
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 that reduce contact rates between infected shrimp and the concentration of 
IHHNV in the water column, allow water exchanges between the zones and the open ocean, and may 
have provided transmission routes to wild shrimp located along the west coast of the Baja California 
Sur (specifically Bahia Magdalena) and the south coast of Mexico.[9, 12, 99]   
It appears highly plausible that ocean currents may provide a transboundary pathway of entry for 
IHHNV or IHHNV infected shrimp or eggs into coastal waters along the continental United States, given 
a) documented evidence of aquatic pathogen introductions occurring via movement in water and ocean 
currents; and b) published literature linking the spread of IHHNV infection in wild shrimp populations in 
South, Central, and North America to movement of IHHNV virus or infected shrimp in ocean currents 
and/or water exchanges (Figures 1 - 4).   
16 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Literature reported locations of IHHNV-infected wild shrimp populations in North, Central, and 
South American coastal waters. [4, 5, 8-19, 62, 89, 100].  USDA figure. 
 
 

17 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Brief schematic overview of global ocean currents. All ocean currents, seasonal upwellings, and 
gyres are not represented. [100-109] 
 
 
Figure 3.  Brief schematic overview of ocean currents on the Pacific coast of the Baja Peninsula. All 
ocean currents, seasonal upwellings, and gyres are not represented.[100, 101, 103, 107] USDA figure. 
 

18 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 

Text Len: 1609
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 [100-109] 
 
 
Figure 3.  Brief schematic overview of ocean currents on the Pacific coast of the Baja Peninsula. All 
ocean currents, seasonal upwellings, and gyres are not represented.[100, 101, 103, 107] USDA figure. 
 

18 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Brief schematic overview of ocean currents in the Gulf of Mexico. All ocean currents, seasonal 
upwellings, and gyres are not represented.[100, 101, 105, 106, 108-111] 
 
Pathway 3:  Nauplii, post-larvae, or broodstock imported for aquaculture purposes  
The literature identifies imported nauplii and juvenile and broodstock shrimp as potential and known 
sources of pathogen introduction in shrimp aquaculture.[2, 112] Non-native shrimp from foreign 
hatcheries are imported to the United States for aquaculture purposes, which may result in 
transboundary introduction of IHHNV.[113]  As examples, introductions of IHHNV into domestic shrimp 
aquaculture facilities were associated with importation of live shrimp from IHHNV-affected countries in 
2013, 2018, and 2019.[2, 23]  In general, there are no import regulations or requirements for 
Certificates of Veterinary Inspection to certify that imported live shrimp are healthy or disease-free, and 
there is a lack of capability to quarantine live shrimp prior to import release. It is highly plausible that 
live shrimp imported for aquaculture purposes will serve as transboundary pathways of IHHNV 
introduction, given the above and a) the pathogenesis and epidemiology of IHHNV
Text Len: 1547
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Veterinary Inspection to certify that imported live shrimp are healthy or disease-free, and 
there is a lack of capability to quarantine live shrimp prior to import release. It is highly plausible that 
live shrimp imported for aquaculture purposes will serve as transboundary pathways of IHHNV 
introduction, given the above and a) the pathogenesis and epidemiology of IHHNV in some shrimp 
species; b) the rapid transportation time associated with air freight; c) lack of data reporting the 
sources, volumes, and final disposition pathways of shrimp imported for aquaculture; d) lack of a 
national standardized domestic surveillance program for IHHNV; and e) lack of standardized 
biosecurity and disease surveillance measures among domestic shrimp aquaculture facilities.  
 
Pathway 4:  Imported shrimp for human consumption  
IHHNV is viable in chilled and frozen-thawed shrimp tissues. Since the 1990s, the literature has 
reported presence of IHHNV and other pathogenic shrimp viruses including Taura syndrome virus 
(TSV), white spot syndrome virus (WSSV), and yellowhead virus (YHV) in imported frozen commodity 
shrimp.[112, 114, 115]  
The United States imports shrimp seafood commodities from countries that a) are WOAH -listed; b) 
have reported an IHHNV outbreak to WOAH in the last 2 years; and c) have literature-reported 
presence in cultured or wild shrimp populations (Table 5). It is possible the United States may import 
seafood commodities from non- WOAH member countries where IHHNV is present, but surveillance 
and reporting are lacking.  

19 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
Table 5. Edible shrimp products1 exported to the United States by countries that are a)
Text Len: 1706
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 cultured or wild shrimp populations (Table 5). It is possible the United States may import 
seafood commodities from non- WOAH member countries where IHHNV is present, but surveillance 
and reporting are lacking.  

19 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
Table 5. Edible shrimp products1 exported to the United States by countries that are a) WOAH listed; b) 
reported to have IHHNV in aquaculture; c) reported to have IHHNV in wild shrimp populations; or d) have 
reported an outbreak to WOAH from 2019 to 2021.[2, 3, 62, 66, 115-117] 
aWOAH listed 
bLiterature reported presence in cultured aquaculture 
cLiterature reported presence in wild shrimp populations in the Americas 
dWOAH reported outbreak in the last 2 years 
1 Edible shrimp product includes fresh or chilled peeled, frozen peeled, frozen not peeled, frozen headless shell-on, not frozen 
shell-on, and live fresh or chilled shell-on) 
20 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Only healthy-appearing shrimp are to be processed for human consumption and imported products must 
be prepared in processing facilities regulated and inspected by the country of origin’s government and 
meet USDA and Food and Drug Administration processing requirements. However, IHHNV-infected 
shrimp can appear healthy, and some IHHNV outbreak control measures may include harvest of infected 
shrimp for human commodity pathways.[2, 115, 118] Inspection rates by U.S. regulatory agencies or 
contracted third-party inspectors are typically low at foreign processing facilities compared to the number 
of facilities that produce seafood. In addition, country-of-origin government oversight may be unknown to 
U.S. regulatory
Text Len: 1694
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 control measures may include harvest of infected 
shrimp for human commodity pathways.[2, 115, 118] Inspection rates by U.S. regulatory agencies or 
contracted third-party inspectors are typically low at foreign processing facilities compared to the number 
of facilities that produce seafood. In addition, country-of-origin government oversight may be unknown to 
U.S. regulatory agencies. Currently, there are no U.S. Federal regulations requiring imported frozen 
shrimp destined for human consumption to be screened for aquatic pathogens.[114]  Entry of IHHNV 
into the United States via this pathway has not been documented; however, given this information, it 
seems highly plausible that imported shrimp seafood commodities may pose a transboundary pathway 
of entry for IHHNV. 
 
Pathway 5: Imported bait shrimp   
The United States imports bait shrimp for use in inland freshwater and marine sport fishing.[114] A 
simple internet search shows that imported bait shrimp may be purchased online and in bait shops 
throughout the United States.  
The literature has identified imported bait shrimp as a potential source of aquatic pathogen introduction 
[112, 114], and studies by Prior et al. (2001) and Hasson et al. (2006) demonstrated the presence of 
this pathway in the United States via identification of TSV and WSSV in imported frozen bait shrimp 
purchased at bait and grocery stores.[114, 119] IHHNV was not detected in either published study, and 
a literature search did not identify subsequent studies performing surveillance for IHHNV in imported 
bait shrimp. 
The volume of bait shrimp imported to the United States annually is not known, because bait shrimp 
are imported under the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States, subheading 0511.91.0090 
“Products
Text Len: 1791
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 in either published study, and 
a literature search did not identify subsequent studies performing surveillance for IHHNV in imported 
bait shrimp. 
The volume of bait shrimp imported to the United States annually is not known, because bait shrimp 
are imported under the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States, subheading 0511.91.0090 
“Products of Fish or Crustacean, Molluscs, or Other Aquatic Invertebrates; Dead Animals of Chapter 3, 
Unfit for Human Consumption, NESOI.”[120] From 2015 to 2020, the United States imported an 
average 76,909,345 kg/169,556,081 lb (range 64,343,192 to 97,492,406 kg/141,852,456 to 
214,933,964 lb) of such product, including from countries with a WOAH listing for IHHNV, that have 
reported IHHNV detections in the literature, or that experienced a recent outbreak or occurrence of 
IHHNV that was reported to WOAH (Table 6). The percentage of bait shrimp in these shipments is 
unknown.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Table 6. Quantity of dead fish, crustaceans, mollusks, or other aquatic invertebrates unfit for 
human consumption exported to the United States between 2015 and 2020 from countries with 
IHHNV presence in cultured or wild shrimp populations as determined by WOAH or as reported 
in the literature.[3-5, 8-19, 120, 121] 
Country Year 2015 Year 2016 Year 2017 Year 2018 Year 2019 Year 2020 
Argentinab,c 1,942,102 2,626,144
Text Len: 1427
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 between 2015 and 2020 from countries with 
IHHNV presence in cultured or wild shrimp populations as determined by WOAH or as reported 
in the literature.[3-5, 8-19, 120, 121] 
Country Year 2015 Year 2016 Year 2017 Year 2018 Year 2019 Year 2020 
Argentinab,c 1,942,102 2,626,144 2,294,126 1,285,622 641,424 911,610 
Australiaa,b,c 3,350 1,040 6,630 2,000 1,052 468 
Canadad 43,769,276 58,584,020 51,351,640 43,871,560 51,180,538 47,799,388 
Chinaa,b 1,982,636 5,533,350 3,687,750 1,846,862 1,442,630 2,103,800 
Colombiaa,b,c 6,758 0 0 0 0 0 
Costa Ricaa,b 0 0 0 0 0 590 
Ecuadora,b,c 2,583,980 2,342,336 2,924,522 4,103,810 93,720 2,131,740 
Guatemalaa,b 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Hondurasa,b,c 0 0 0 0 0 1,000 
Indiaa,b,c 47,992 62,690 60,562 181,098 49,744 5,526 
Indonesiaa,b,c 131,636 255,822 202,194 145,382 153,366 664,058 
Japanb 205,418 855,868 781,942 520,390 1,035,364 1,639,290 
Mexicoa,
Text Len: 885
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
562 181,098 49,744 5,526 
Indonesiaa,b,c 131,636 255,822 202,194 145,382 153,366 664,058 
Japanb 205,418 855,868 781,942 520,390 1,035,364 1,639,290 
Mexicoa,b,c 5,639,276 9,128,838 15,132,120 2,524,924 1,845,292 3,518,322 
Nicaraguaa,b,c 55,002 43,924 44,686 34,058 103,858 39,608 
Panamaa,b,c 36,000 39,374 39,600 90,874 77,162 94,352 
Perua,b,c 466,462 1,641,486 341,848 92,356 1,077,084 221,300 
Philippinesa,b,c 219,336 224,614 130,252 151,064 95,546 78,708 
Singaporeb 0 0 0 0 0 0 
South Koreab 6,380,930 5,424,456 4,297,974 2,369,874 294,000 157,642 
Sri Lankaa,b,c 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Taiwanb 7,587,192 10,079,116 8,622,556 5,691,488 6,392,058 5,139,018 
Thailanda,b,c 60,840 24,256 68,296 328,298 77,266 610,878 
United 
Kingdomd 1,065,272 47,132 76,940 448,762 415,718 3,967,848 
V
Text Len: 784
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 5,691,488 6,392,058 5,139,018 
Thailanda,b,c 60,840 24,256 68,296 328,298 77,266 610,878 
United 
Kingdomd 1,065,272 47,132 76,940 448,762 415,718 3,967,848 
Venezuelab 0 0 0 0 41662 63140 
Vietnamb 280,326 577,940 775,048 654,770 1,273,290 878,942 
Total 72,463,784 97,492,406 90,838,686 64,343,192 66,290,774 70,027,228 
aWOAH listed 
bLiterature reported presence in cultured aquaculture 
cLiterature reported presence in wild shrimp populations in the Americas 
dWOAH reported outbreak in the last 2 years 
22 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
It is highly plausible that imported bait shrimp may provide a transboundary pathway of entry for IHHNV 
given the volume and sources of dead fish, crustaceans, mollusks, or other aquatic invertebrates unfit 
for human consumption exported to the United States, and the documented presence of aquatic 
pathogens present in imported bait shrimp. Lack of detection of IHHNV in the limited number of studies 
that have explored this entry pathway does not negate the potential for IHHNV introduction to occur.  
Potential Exposure Pathways  
An entry pathway, as defined by WOAH, is a pathway from the point of entry that leads to exposure of 
vulnerable animal or human populations to a hazard.[43]  
Pathway 1: Introduction of IHHNV-infected shrimp into aquaculture facilities  
As
Text Len: 1345
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HHNV introduction to occur.  
Potential Exposure Pathways  
An entry pathway, as defined by WOAH, is a pathway from the point of entry that leads to exposure of 
vulnerable animal or human populations to a hazard.[43]  
Pathway 1: Introduction of IHHNV-infected shrimp into aquaculture facilities  
As stated in the Entry Assessment, a) non-native shrimp from foreign hatcheries are imported to the 
United States for aquaculture purposes [113]; and b) IHHNV introductions in domestic shrimp 
aquaculture facilities have been epidemiologically linked to imported IHHNV-infected live shrimp in 
2013, 2018, and 2019.[2, 117]. These occurrences, and the transfer of IHHNV-infected animals 
between domestic facilities in 2019, demonstrate that a) shrimp are imported to stock aquaculture 
facilities; b) some of the imported shrimp included IHHNV-infected animals; and c) this is a documented 
exposure pathway of IHHNV introduction. These introductions have occurred despite availability of 
selectively bred specific pathogen-free (SPF) shrimp [122], regulation or permitting guidelines for non-
native shrimp culture in some States [123, 124], and guidelines and standards for importation and 
transit of aquatic animal products and disease control and prevention outlined in the WOAH Aquatic 
Animal Health Code.[2, 55] 
 
Pathway 2: Shrimp imported for human consumption  
The presence of this exposure pathway has been documented via epidemiological investigations of 
aquaculture disease outbreaks (e.g., WSSV in Australia), and research studies that have a) detected 
aquaculture pathogens, including IHHNV, in imported shrimp commodities sold in grocery stores and 
marketplaces;
Text Len: 1686
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Pathway 2: Shrimp imported for human consumption  
The presence of this exposure pathway has been documented via epidemiological investigations of 
aquaculture disease outbreaks (e.g., WSSV in Australia), and research studies that have a) detected 
aquaculture pathogens, including IHHNV, in imported shrimp commodities sold in grocery stores and 
marketplaces; and b) demonstrated transmission of WOAH-listed shrimp pathogens from imported 
shrimp seafoods to susceptible animals.[112, 114, 115, 119, 121, 125, 126] Methods by which this 
exposure pathway may occur include the following:  
 
Processing plants 
An unknown volume of imported commodity shrimp products is reprocessed in domestic plants located 
throughout the United States, including those on coastal bays and estuaries where native penaeid 
shrimp are present. Some plants may be located near shrimp aquaculture facilities.[112, 115] 
Processors of fish and fishery products are subject to Seafood HACCP Regulation (21 CFR Part 123 
and other regulation [i.e., Current Good Manufacturing Practice regulation, 21 CFR Parts 113 and 
114]).[127] However, such regulations are designed to ensure human public health; monitoring seafood 
processing for aquaculture safety is not under the purview of such regulations. Surveillance for human 
pathogens of concern is conducted as part of normal regulatory inspection, but such surveillance for 
aquaculture pathogens is not performed.  
 
23 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Primary routes of pathogen release from processing plants occur via inadequate disinfection, 
discharge, disposal, or storage of solid or liquid wastes.[128] Proximity between processing plants and 
susceptible wild or farmed shrimp populations increases the risk of disease introduction, with
Text Len: 1799
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 performed.  
 
23 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Primary routes of pathogen release from processing plants occur via inadequate disinfection, 
discharge, disposal, or storage of solid or liquid wastes.[128] Proximity between processing plants and 
susceptible wild or farmed shrimp populations increases the risk of disease introduction, with on-farm 
processing presenting the greatest level of risk, especially if the plant processes shrimp from outside 
sources.[128, 129] Data are not readily accessible on the proximity of plants that process imported 
commodity shrimp to susceptible farmed or indigenous shrimp populations.  
 
While processing plants are required to monitor waste streams to prevent inadvertent release of 
contaminants, a) the level of oversight at all plants is unknown; b) violations occur; c) there are no 
regulations requiring surveillance of processing waste for aquatic pathogens; and d) the efficacy of 
effluent, wastewater, and solid waste treatments on inactivation of IHHNV is not known. Discharge of 
effluent or wastewater containing viable IHHNV into sewer systems or coastal or inland waterways 
could provide a plausible pathway of exposure to susceptible wild and cultured shrimp 
populations.[112, 130, 131] Solid seafood processing wastes may be incorporated into wastewater 
treatment steps to produce sludge or disposed of via solid waste streams (e.g., landfills, compost, 
burying) or land application (as fertilizer). Landfill operators are required to monitor groundwater for 
microbial contamination but it is unknown a) how methods used may correlate with the presence of 
aquatic animal pathogens; and b) whether or not groundwater is monitored for presence of aquatic 
animal pathogens.[132-134] The literature has reported microbial contamination of groundwater 
associated with landfills, composting, burial
Text Len: 1885
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 fertilizer). Landfill operators are required to monitor groundwater for 
microbial contamination but it is unknown a) how methods used may correlate with the presence of 
aquatic animal pathogens; and b) whether or not groundwater is monitored for presence of aquatic 
animal pathogens.[132-134] The literature has reported microbial contamination of groundwater 
associated with landfills, composting, burial, and land application of processing plant waste slurry [132, 
133]; such research has not been conducted relative to aquaculture pathogens, including IHHNV. Lack 
of documentation does not mean that such events may not occur. Wildlife and birds that forage on 
landfills and composted or buried waste could consume IHHNV-infected tissues and serve as fomites 
or transmission vectors, transporting the virus to shrimp farms or natural water bodies. Given the 
above, it does appear plausible that waste streams associated with processing of imported shrimp 
could provide a plausible IHHNV exposure pathway.  
 
Disposal of imported shrimp seafood as waste 
Approximately 40 percent of commercial seafood produced is discarded as waste [135] with landfill 
disposal listed as the most common waste disposal pathway. Seafood waste may also be disposed of 
via composting and burial, and consumers may dispose of shrimp heads and other tissues into native 
waters.[123] The total volume of imported commodity shrimp discarded as waste is not known, and 
there are no published studies assessing a) landfilled, composted, or buried shrimp seafood waste, or 
adjacent ground or surface waters; and b) the transmission potential of wildlife and birds.  However, it 
is highly plausible that disposal of commodity shrimp wastes as described may provide a pathway of 
IHHNV exposure to susceptible crustaceans given a) the viability of IHHNV in frozen-thawed shrimp 
tissues
Text Len: 1878
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, or buried shrimp seafood waste, or 
adjacent ground or surface waters; and b) the transmission potential of wildlife and birds.  However, it 
is highly plausible that disposal of commodity shrimp wastes as described may provide a pathway of 
IHHNV exposure to susceptible crustaceans given a) the viability of IHHNV in frozen-thawed shrimp 
tissues; b) documented presence of IHHNV in imported commodity shrimp products; c) the potential 
water contamination pathways associated with landfill, composted, and buried wastes as described in 
the section above, and d) the potential for direct disposition of imported shrimp wastes into water 
bodies.[136] [137] [138-140]  
 
Use of imported shrimp seafood as bait 
Imported shrimp products intended for human consumption may be used as bait and have been 
associated with the introduction of aquatic FADs. For example, use of imported frozen uncooked 
24 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
shrimp for bait by recreational fishermen was considered the most likely pathway of WSSV introduction 
into Moreton Bay, South East Queensland, Australia in 1992.[141, 142] In 2019, a survey indicated that 
approximately 27 percent of recreational fishermen in Australia still purchase raw imported shrimp from 
supermarkets for use as bait, and that hundreds of tons of frozen imported shrimp were entering 
Australian waterways annually due to this activity. The frequency of use and volume of imported human 
food quality shrimp used as bait for sportfishing in the United States is not known. However, is 
reasonable to assume that a) this activity occurs; and b) the volume of such products used may be 
large. An internet search identified several recreational fishing sites and chat boards recommending 
use of frozen shrimp purchased from grocery stores or supermarkets; such product was described on 

Text Len: 1866
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
food quality shrimp used as bait for sportfishing in the United States is not known. However, is 
reasonable to assume that a) this activity occurs; and b) the volume of such products used may be 
large. An internet search identified several recreational fishing sites and chat boards recommending 
use of frozen shrimp purchased from grocery stores or supermarkets; such product was described on 
some sites as “superior to commercial bait shrimp.” IHHNV introductions via this pathway have not 
been reported in the United States; however, given the epidemiology of IHHNV, persistence of viable 
IHHNV in frozen shrimp tissues, and apparent use of commodity shrimp for bait in the United States, 
exposure of susceptible wild or farmed shrimp via this pathway appears plausible. 
 
Use of imported shrimp seafood as food for aquatic animals 
Imported human food quality shrimp may be used as food for aquatic animals. Zoos, aquariums, and 
similar facilities incorporate seafood into the diets of aquatic animals (e.g., cephalopods, crustaceans, 
fish, marine mammals).[143-145]  People may also incorporate frozen shrimp seafood into diets for 
aquatic pets. An internet search identified multiple websites a) recommending feeding of freeze-dried 
and/or thawed frozen fresh- and salt-water shrimp to a variety of aquatic pets; and b) advertising 
imported pet foods containing or composed of krill and/or freeze-dried or frozen fresh- and saltwater 
shrimp products for sale. The validity of this exposure pathway was demonstrated in the 1990s when 
introduction of WSSV into a population of freshwater crayfish housed at a public institution (the 
National Zoo) in the United States was traced back to the feeding of imported shrimp seafood.[115, 
146] In the United
Text Len: 1771
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 or frozen fresh- and saltwater 
shrimp products for sale. The validity of this exposure pathway was demonstrated in the 1990s when 
introduction of WSSV into a population of freshwater crayfish housed at a public institution (the 
National Zoo) in the United States was traced back to the feeding of imported shrimp seafood.[115, 
146] In the United States, transmission of IHHNV to susceptible wild or farmed shrimp populations via 
this practice has not been documented. However, it appears plausible that exposure of susceptible 
animals may occur via this exposure pathway, given that a) FAD introduction has occurred via this 
practice; b) oral IHHNV transmission can occur; c) the stability of IHHNV in thawed frozen shrimp 
tissues; d) current lack of surveillance of shrimp seafood for diseases of concern to aquaculture; and e) 
recommended incorporation of shrimp in aquatic animal diets.  
 
Pathway 3: Imported bait shrimp  
Bait shrimp are used for recreational freshwater and marine fishing. The volume of bait shrimp 
exported to the United States is unknown; however, an internet search identified a) imported bait 
shrimp (e.g., freshwater and saltwater) for sale in the United States; and b) chat boards discussing use 
of bait shrimp. There are currently no Federal regulations requiring screening of imported bait shrimp 
for aquatic pathogens of concern. Some States (e.g., Texas) do have regulations in place regarding 
use of any type of imported shrimp (e.g., live, dead, whole or in pieces) from a non-Gulf of Mexico 
State or different country as bait.[147] Rates of enforcement of and compliance with such regulations 
by fishermen are unknown. Given the accessibility of such product and recommendations for use on 
various internet sites,
Text Len: 1768
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 regulations in place regarding 
use of any type of imported shrimp (e.g., live, dead, whole or in pieces) from a non-Gulf of Mexico 
State or different country as bait.[147] Rates of enforcement of and compliance with such regulations 
by fishermen are unknown. Given the accessibility of such product and recommendations for use on 
various internet sites, it appears that bait shrimp may be used for fishing with some regularity. 
Currently, there are no published reports describing detection of IHHNV in imported bait shrimp or 
exposure of susceptible shrimp populations to IHHNV via use of bait shrimp. Lack of data or 
25 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
confirmation of an IHHNV introduction occurring via this pathway does not preclude the potential for 
exposure of susceptible wild or farmed shrimp to occur via use of bait shrimp for fishing.  
 
Pathway 4: Imported shrimp by-product 
Unknown quantities of imported shrimp meal, cuticle meal, and other byproducts are used as feed 
ingredients in aquaculture. The high temperatures used to prepare meal-type byproducts is likely 
sufficient to inactivate IHHNV, and there are no studies or field reports showing that IHHNV 
transmission has occurred via this pathway. Given this information, it does not appear plausible that 
imported shrimp byproducts incorporated into aquatic animal feeds would provide a pathway of IHHNV 
exposure to susceptible farmed shrimp.  
 
Pathway 5: Exposure via water used for aquaculture  
The literature reports that movement of aquatic pathogens, including IHHNV, via organic matter, 
plankton, and shrimp at all life stages suspended in ocean currents (e.g., from endemically affected 
areas, shipping ports, processing plants, aquac
Text Len: 1750
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
med shrimp.  
 
Pathway 5: Exposure via water used for aquaculture  
The literature reports that movement of aquatic pathogens, including IHHNV, via organic matter, 
plankton, and shrimp at all life stages suspended in ocean currents (e.g., from endemically affected 
areas, shipping ports, processing plants, aquaculture facilities) is a plausible disease exposure 
pathway for susceptible farmed and wild shrimp populations. For example, genetic analysis suggests 
that IHHNV was introduced into wild shrimp populations in the GoC via intensive penaeid shrimp 
aquaculture, and introduction of other shrimp pathogens (WSSV) from local wild populations into 
aquaculture facilities has been reported.[10, 12, 62, 112, 148, 149]  Shrimp farms that are not highly 
biosecure, are located on coastlines, have open ponds, and use seawater may be more prone to 
disease introduction via this exposure pathway.[9, 150, 151] Inland facilities and farms with good 
biosecurity measures are less likely to incur an IHHNV introduction via this pathway. Biosecurity 
measures include using deep sea water wells or underground fresh water aquifers as water sources, 
treating/filtering influent, covering rearing structures and ponds, ensuring that ponds are dried 
overwinter, and using low exchange or recirculating water systems.[150, 152] Close proximity of shrimp 
farms to other shrimp-rearing facilities, shrimp-processing plants, shipping ports, and susceptible wild 
shrimp populations, increases the risk of disease introduction as well.[5, 10, 14]  
Federal and State effluent regulations are typically specific to water quality (e.g., levels of ammonia, 
dissolved oxygen, total suspended sol
Text Len: 1693
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 of shrimp 
farms to other shrimp-rearing facilities, shrimp-processing plants, shipping ports, and susceptible wild 
shrimp populations, increases the risk of disease introduction as well.[5, 10, 14]  
Federal and State effluent regulations are typically specific to water quality (e.g., levels of ammonia, 
dissolved oxygen, total suspended solids) and do not mandate testing for presence of aquatic 
pathogens.[38] Some facility-specific and/or State mandated BMP biosecurity measures include 
effluent water treatment guidelines designed to prevent releases of aquatic pathogens and animals.[38, 
114] Aquaculture facilities typically treat influent water and use screens or filters at ingress points to 
optimize water quality and prevent introduction of aquatic pathogens or animals. Despite these control 
measures, the literature describes aquatic animal and pathogen introductions via inadequately treated 
or contaminated influent water and/or accidental intake or migration of infected crustaceans. The 
literature also describes aquatic pathogen introductions from aquaculture facilities to wild populations 
associated with release of inadequately treated effluent water and/or accidental release or migration of 
infected animals.[14, 112, 150] Unexpected water control failures (e.g., water treatment failures, 
accidental releases, weather events, overtopping of ponds, flooding) may lead to accidental exposure 
events as well. Given the above, it does appear IHHNV present in water used or discharged by shrimp 
aquaculture facilities can pose a plausible pathway of virus exposure to susceptible shrimp 
populations.  
26 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Pathway 6: Introduction of IHHNV-infected wild shrimp into aquaculture facilities (or vice versa)   
Published literature describes escape of farmed shrimp
Text Len: 1846
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 used or discharged by shrimp 
aquaculture facilities can pose a plausible pathway of virus exposure to susceptible shrimp 
populations.  
26 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
Pathway 6: Introduction of IHHNV-infected wild shrimp into aquaculture facilities (or vice versa)   
Published literature describes escape of farmed shrimp from, and introduction of wild shrimp into, 
aquaculture facilities as potential mechanisms for transfer of IHHNV and other aquaculture pathogens 
(e.g., WSSV, YHV, TSV) into susceptible cultured or wild shrimp populations.[112, 153] Escapes or 
accidental releases of cultured shrimp (e.g., P. vannamei, P. monodon, M. rosenbergii) have been 
documented in continental U.S. coastal waters, Puerto Rico, and Hawaii, as have introductions of wild 
shrimp and other animals into aquaculture facilities.[77, 79, 82, 153, 154] Because most shrimp 
species cannot walk on land (except  M. dienbienphuense) such introductions likely occurred via water 
as described in previous pathway. Exposure of susceptible wild or cultured shrimp to pathogens, 
including IHHNV, has not been confirmed via this pathway, but lack of data does not preclude the 
plausibility that this pathway could occur.  
 
Pathway 7: Intentional, accidental, or malicious release  
There are no national or international reports of intentional, accidental, or malicious releases of shrimp 
or other aquaculture species a) into shrimp aquaculture facilities; or b) resulting in introduction of an 
aquatic pathogen, including IHHNV. Intentional releases may include release of pet shrimp or aquatic 
animals, or transfer
Text Len: 1634
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, or malicious release  
There are no national or international reports of intentional, accidental, or malicious releases of shrimp 
or other aquaculture species a) into shrimp aquaculture facilities; or b) resulting in introduction of an 
aquatic pathogen, including IHHNV. Intentional releases may include release of pet shrimp or aquatic 
animals, or transfer of wild aquatic animals, into aquaculture facilities.[155] Accidental releases may 
include release of farmed shrimp into natural water bodies or introduction of wild shrimp into 
aquaculture via unexpected failure of biosecurity measures, equipment, or rearing structures as 
described above. Malicious releases would include acts of sabotage or agricultural terrorism.[156, 157]   
Shrimp farms that are not highly biosecure (e.g., lack perimeter fencing, have open ponds, are near 
urban areas or roadways) may be more susceptible to release of animals into shrimp-rearing 
structures. Farms with good biosecurity measures (e.g., perimeter fencing, limited public access, or 
covered or contained rearing structures) would be less susceptible to introduction of aquatic animals or 
an aquatic pathogen. Introduction of IHHNV or other aquatic pathogens via this exposure pathway has 
not been reported; however, lack of reporting does not preclude the plausibility that diseases may be 
introduced into an aquaculture facility via these mechanisms. 
Pathways Summary 
Given available data and reference materials, the most plausible pathways of entry include a) live 
shrimp imported for use in aquaculture; b) imported commodity and bait shrimp; and c) movement of 
IHHNV in water from areas of presence to locations where naïve susceptible shrimp are present. There 
is lack of published literature definitively linking ballast water, ship fouling, or imported commodity
Text Len: 1837
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and reference materials, the most plausible pathways of entry include a) live 
shrimp imported for use in aquaculture; b) imported commodity and bait shrimp; and c) movement of 
IHHNV in water from areas of presence to locations where naïve susceptible shrimp are present. There 
is lack of published literature definitively linking ballast water, ship fouling, or imported commodity and 
bait shrimp to IHHNV entry. However, given that these are known modes of aquatic pathogen 
introduction, it is plausible that these pathways may lead to IHHNV introduction. Introduction of IHHNV 
from areas of known presence (wild and farmed shrimp) to areas where naïve shrimp populations are 
present has been documented, indicating that this is a plausible entry pathway. Live shrimp imported 
for use in aquaculture has been demonstrated to be a pathway of entry, including into the United 
States.   
The most plausible pathway of exposure for domestic aquaculture is introduction of IHHNV-infected 
shrimp into facilities, given that past IHHNV introductions have occurred via imported shrimp and 
shrimp transferred among facilities. Presence of IHHNV in water and introductions of IHHNV-infected 
wild shrimp present in water are less plausible, given that aquaculture facility influent water is likely 
27 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
filtered and treated prior to use. However, inadvertent or accidental introduction may occur via these 
mechanisms due to poor biosecurity an unexpected water quality management failure. Exposures via 
commodity shrimp, bait shrimp, shrimp by-product, and accidental, malicious, or intentional release 
appear least plausible. Plausible pathways of exposure for indigenous wild penaeid shrimp include the 
various pathways associated with commodity shrimp imported for human
Text Len: 1829
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 these 
mechanisms due to poor biosecurity an unexpected water quality management failure. Exposures via 
commodity shrimp, bait shrimp, shrimp by-product, and accidental, malicious, or intentional release 
appear least plausible. Plausible pathways of exposure for indigenous wild penaeid shrimp include the 
various pathways associated with commodity shrimp imported for human consumption, imported bait 
shrimp, presence of IHHNV in water, and accidental release of cultured shrimp. 
Potential Impacts 
IHHNV is an economically relevant viral pathogen of shrimp aquaculture. Sellars et al. 2019 reported 
that shrimp farms stocked with high viral load IHHNV-infected post-larvae shrimp resulted in reduced 
performance, lower survivability, higher food conversion ratios, and production losses approximating 
$67,000 per hectare/2.47 acres of farm gate value compared to farms stocked with post-larvae carrying 
a low to zero IHHNV viral load.[7, 56] Primary shrimp-producing States include Alabama, Arkansas, 
California, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Ohio, South 
Carolina, Tennessee, and Texas.[120] Cultivated susceptible crustaceans reared in the United States 
include whiteleg shrimp (P. vannamei), which are a principal focus of production in U.S. aquaculture. 
Most broodstock is produced in Texas, Hawaii, and Florida. Texas is the leading shrimp-producing 
State, producing 1.68 million kg/3.7 million lb. of product in 2009. In 2007, P. vannamei was considered 
the fourth most valuable aquaculture species in Texas, following catfish, red drum, and hybrid striped 
bass. In 2016, the United States produced 1.8
Text Len: 1675
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and Florida. Texas is the leading shrimp-producing 
State, producing 1.68 million kg/3.7 million lb. of product in 2009. In 2007, P. vannamei was considered 
the fourth most valuable aquaculture species in Texas, following catfish, red drum, and hybrid striped 
bass. In 2016, the United States produced 1.8 million kg/4 million lb. of shrimp, valued at $10 million 
USD. In 2019, the United States exported over $123 million USD worth of shrimp products (e.g., fresh, 
$50 million USD; frozen, $40 million USD; and prepared, $33 million USD). The top receiving countries 
were India ($20 million USD), Canada ($20 million USD), Vietnam ($14 million USD), and Denmark 
($12 million USD) (DATAWEB).  
The impact that introduction of IHHNV might have on U.S. shrimp aquaculture depends on a) where 
the introduction(s) occur; b) time to detection and reporting of the introductions; c) the number and type 
of aquaculture facilities affected; d) the type of control measures implemented; and f) surveillance and 
biosecurity measures used by the industry as preventative and outbreak response measures. The 
United States reported two disease events between January 2019 and January 2020. Both events 
were controlled with quarantine and voluntary depopulation measures. These IHHNV detections had 
serious consequences on domestic reputations and international trade, including effectively closing the 
shrimp export market to Canada since 2019. If a large-scale outbreak occurred within the industry, it is 
plausible that significant economic and export trade consequences may occur.  
Lack of capability to perform parallel or series surveillance or diagnostic testing for IHHNV and EVE 
genomic material could lead
Text Len: 1718
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 consequences on domestic reputations and international trade, including effectively closing the 
shrimp export market to Canada since 2019. If a large-scale outbreak occurred within the industry, it is 
plausible that significant economic and export trade consequences may occur.  
Lack of capability to perform parallel or series surveillance or diagnostic testing for IHHNV and EVE 
genomic material could lead to transboundary or domestic a) movement of apparently healthy IHHNV-
infected farmed shrimp; b) culling of healthy non-IHHNV infected shrimp with EVE sequences.  Both 
potential outcomes could cause local primary economic impacts to shrimp producers, secondary 
impacts to associated industries and could result in international import/export consequences.  
Assessment of the effect of IHHNV introduction into native penaeid shrimp populations was not within 
the scope of this document. The effect that such introduction may have is not known due to lack of data 
on species susceptibility to IHHNV and other factors. If native penaeid shrimp are susceptible to IHHNV 
and if environmental conditions are favorable to sustaining an outbreak, local and regional 
28 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
consequences may be impactful. Environmental consequences may be direct to the affected shrimp 
populations and could indirectly disrupt food webs and the overall ecology of affected areas. Local 
fisheries that harvest wild shrimp would be economically impacted. 
Limitations 
There are data gaps present for every pathway identified in this document that limited capability to fully 
assess their individual potential for transboundary entry or animal exposure. Unless resolved, these 
data gaps will affect capability to develop future transboundary or domestic risk assessments or risk 
analyses and to develop a domestic response plan. 
Data and resource gaps include, but are not limited to: 
• Lack
Text Len: 1937
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 every pathway identified in this document that limited capability to fully 
assess their individual potential for transboundary entry or animal exposure. Unless resolved, these 
data gaps will affect capability to develop future transboundary or domestic risk assessments or risk 
analyses and to develop a domestic response plan. 
Data and resource gaps include, but are not limited to: 
• Lack of research relative to the mechanisms of virus infection and virulence in crustacean 
species 
• Lack of research and development of diagnostic modalities relative to EVE sequences 
• Lack of data reporting on IHHNV surveillance in domestic aquaculture 
• Lack of data reporting on IHHNV surveillance in indigenous penaeid shrimp populations 
• Lack of published research exploring IHHNV accommodation and tolerance in affected shrimp 
species 
• Incomplete understanding of the effect of vial loads and performance parameters in shrimp that 
exhibit viral accommodation or tolerance  
• Lack of experimental challenge studies meeting WOAH criteria for natural exposure evaluating 
the susceptibility of farmed and native shrimp to IHHNV 
• Lack of data reporting on the volume and disposition of live shrimp imported for aquaculture 
purposes 
• Lack of data reporting on the domestic transit of live shrimp for aquaculture purposes 
• Lack of data on surveillance for IHHNV in ballast water and fouling present on ship hulls 
• Lack of data and hydrological modelling studies evaluating the potential for movement of 
IHHNV from a) potential points of entry to susceptible wild and cultured shrimp population; b) 
known areas of IHHNV presence into the coastal waters of the United States  
• Lack of data reporting IHHNV presence in imported commodity and bait shrimp 
• Lack of data on disposition pathways for commodity shrimp, including waste streams 
• Lack of data on the volume and disposition pathways
Text Len: 1909
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 from a) potential points of entry to susceptible wild and cultured shrimp population; b) 
known areas of IHHNV presence into the coastal waters of the United States  
• Lack of data reporting IHHNV presence in imported commodity and bait shrimp 
• Lack of data on disposition pathways for commodity shrimp, including waste streams 
• Lack of data on the volume and disposition pathways for imported bait shrimp 
• Lack of data on the volume of imported commodity, bait shrimp, or shrimp by-product used as 
food for aquatic animals 
• Lack of data regarding aquaculture facilities’ BMPs, biosecurity measures, disease surveillance 
practices, and other factors  
• Lack of studies modelling potential distribution of IHHNV-susceptible penaeid shrimp species 
and the IHHV virus  
 
 
 
29 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
References 
 
1. Yu, J.-Y., et al., Research progress on hosts and carriers, prevalence, virulence of infectious 
hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV). Journal of Invertebrate Pathology, 
2021. 183: p. 107556. 
2. Awada, Current Animal Health Situation Worldwide: Analysis of Events and Trends. 2020. 
3. Saravanan, K., et al., IHHNV infection from the wild shrimps of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, 
India. Current Science, 2017: p. 2027-2031. 
4. Ramírez, B., et al., A cross‐sectional study of shrimp pathogens in wild shrimp, Penaeus 
vannamei and Penaeus stylirostris in Tumbes, Peru. Aquaculture Research, 2021. 52(3): p
Text Len: 1479
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Nicobar Islands, 
India. Current Science, 2017: p. 2027-2031. 
4. Ramírez, B., et al., A cross‐sectional study of shrimp pathogens in wild shrimp, Penaeus 
vannamei and Penaeus stylirostris in Tumbes, Peru. Aquaculture Research, 2021. 52(3): p. 
1118-1126. 
5. Hernández-Pérez, A., et al., Presence of infectious hypodermal and haematopoietic necrosis 
virus (IHHNV) in native shrimps from southern Mexico. Open Journal of Marine Science, 2017. 
7(03): p. 424. 
6. (OIE), W.O.f.A.H., Manual of Diagnostic Tests for Aquatic Animals. 7th Edition ed. 2018. 
7. Aranguren Caro, L.F., et al., Current status of infection with infectious hypodermal and 
hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV) in the Peruvian and Ecuadorian shrimp industry. Plos 
one, 2022. 17(8): p. e0272456. 
8. Lightner, D.V., R. Redman, and T. Bell, Infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis, a 
newly recognized virus disease of penaeid shrimp. Journal of Invertebrate Pathology, 1983. 
42(1): p. 62-70. 
9. Robles-Sikisaka, R., et al., Genetic signature of rapid IHHNV (infectious hypodermal and 
hematopoietic necrosis virus) expansion in wild penaeus shrimp populations. PLoS One, 2010. 
5(7):
Text Len: 1169
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
tebrate Pathology, 1983. 
42(1): p. 62-70. 
9. Robles-Sikisaka, R., et al., Genetic signature of rapid IHHNV (infectious hypodermal and 
hematopoietic necrosis virus) expansion in wild penaeus shrimp populations. PLoS One, 2010. 
5(7): p. e11799. 
10. Pantoja, C., D. Lightner, and K. Holtschmit, Prevalence and geographic distribution of infectious 
hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV) in wild blue shrimp Penaeus stylirostris 
from the Gulf of California, Mexico. Journal of Aquatic Animal Health, 1999. 11(1): p. 23-34. 
11. Unzueta-Bustamante, M.L., et al., Infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus 
(IHHNV) in wild parent stocks of blue shrimp, Penaeus styfirostris (Stimpson), in Guaymas Bay, 
Sonora, Mexico. Ciencias Marinas, 1998. 24(4): p. 491-498. 
12. Dhar, A.K., et al., Biology, genome organization, and evolution of parvoviruses in marine 
shrimp. Advances in virus research, 2014. 89: p. 85-139. 
13. Nunan, L.M., et al., Prevalence of infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus 
(IHHNV) and white spot syndrome virus (WSSV) in Litopenaeus vannamei in the Pacific Ocean 
off the coast of Panama. Journal of the World Aquaculture Society, 2001
Text Len: 1200
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. 
13. Nunan, L.M., et al., Prevalence of infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus 
(IHHNV) and white spot syndrome virus (WSSV) in Litopenaeus vannamei in the Pacific Ocean 
off the coast of Panama. Journal of the World Aquaculture Society, 2001. 32(3): p. 330-334. 
14. Macías-Rodríguez, N.A., et al., Prevalence of viral pathogens WSSV and IHHNV in wild 
organisms at the Pacific Coast of Mexico. Journal of invertebrate pathology, 2014. 116: p. 8-12. 
15. Alfaro Aguilera, R., M. Guevara Torres, and I. Gonzales Chávez, Prevalencia y distribución de 
los principales agentes etiológicos que afectan los langostinos silvestres en Tumbes, Perú. 
Revista Peruana de Biología, 2010. 17(3): p. 359-364. 
16. Vega‐Heredia, S., F. Mendoza‐Cano, and A. Sánchez‐Paz, The infectious hypodermal and 
haematopoietic necrosis virus: a brief review of what we do and do not know. Transboundary 
and Emerging Diseases, 2012. 59(2): p. 95-105. 
17. Lightner, D., et al., Historic emergence, impact and current status of shrimp pathogens in the 
Americas. Journal of invertebrate pathology, 2012. 110(2): p. 174-183. 
18. Motte, E., et al., Prevention of IHHNV vertical transmission in the
Text Len: 1190
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. 59(2): p. 95-105. 
17. Lightner, D., et al., Historic emergence, impact and current status of shrimp pathogens in the 
Americas. Journal of invertebrate pathology, 2012. 110(2): p. 174-183. 
18. Motte, E., et al., Prevention of IHHNV vertical transmission in the white shrimp Litopenaeus 
vannamei. Aquaculture, 2003. 219(1-4): p. 57-70. 
19. Jiménez, R., et al., Infection of IHHN virus in two species of cultured penaeoid shrimp 
Litopenaeus vannamei (Boone) and Litopenaeus stylirostris (Stimpson) in Ecuador during El 
Niño 1997–98. Aquaculture research, 1999. 30(9): p. 695-705. 
30 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
20. Cavalli, L.S., et al., Natural occurrence of White spot syndrome virus and Infectious hypodermal 
and hematopoietic necrosis virus in Neohelice granulata crab. Journal of invertebrate pathology, 
2013. 114(1): p. 86-88. 
21. Vilasboa, A., et al., Haplotype-specific single-locus multiplex PCR assay for identification of 
Pacific and Atlantic white shrimps, exotic Litopenaeus vannamei and native Litopenaeus 
schmitti, along the coast of Brazil. Conservation Genetics Resources, 2020. 12(1): p. 93-98. 
22. Dhar, A.K., et al., Biology, genome organization, and evolution of parvoviruses in marine 
shrimp, in Advances in virus research
Text Len: 1280
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Litopenaeus vannamei and native Litopenaeus 
schmitti, along the coast of Brazil. Conservation Genetics Resources, 2020. 12(1): p. 93-98. 
22. Dhar, A.K., et al., Biology, genome organization, and evolution of parvoviruses in marine 
shrimp, in Advances in virus research. 2014, Elsevier. p. 85-139. 
23. (OIE), W.O.f.A.H. OIE World Animal Health  Information System Report Archive IHHNV.; 
Available from: https://www.oie.int/wahis_2/public/wahid.php/Diseaseinformation/reportarchive. 
24. (USDA), U.S.D.o.A.-A.a.P.H.I.S. NVAP Reference Guide. 2021; Available from: 
www.aphis.usda.gov/aphis/ourfocus/animalhealth/nvap/NVAP-Reference-Guide/Animal-Health-
Emergency-Management/Notifiable-Diseases-and-Conditions. 
25. Guard, U.C., Standards for living organisms in ships’ ballast water discharged in US waters. 
Federal Register, 2012. 77: p. 17254-17320. 
26. Guard, U.S.C. USCG Ballast Water Management Regulation. 2012; Available from: 
https://www.ballast-water-treatment.com/en/ballast-water-management-regulation/uscg-bwm-
standards. 
27. Office, G.P., Code of Federal Regulation Title 46 Chapter I Subchapter Q Part 162 Subpart 
162.060  Ballast Water Management Systems, U.S.C. Guard
Text Len: 1192
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
https://www.ballast-water-treatment.com/en/ballast-water-management-regulation/uscg-bwm-
standards. 
27. Office, G.P., Code of Federal Regulation Title 46 Chapter I Subchapter Q Part 162 Subpart 
162.060  Ballast Water Management Systems, U.S.C. Guard, Editor. 2020. 
28. Ruiz, G., et al., Status and trends of ballast water management in the United States. First 
Biennial Report of the National Ballast Information Clearinghouse. Submitted to United States 
Coast Guard, 2001. 16. 
29. Gray, D.K., et al., Efficacy of open‐ocean ballast water exchange as a means of preventing 
invertebrate invasions between freshwater ports. Limnology and Oceanography, 2007. 52(6): p. 
2386-2397. 
30. Hwang, J., et al., High diversity and potential translocation of DNA viruses in ballast water. 
Marine pollution bulletin, 2018. 137: p. 449-455. 
31. Kim, Y., et al., Metagenomic investigation of viral communities in ballast water. Environmental 
science & technology, 2015. 49(14): p. 8396-8407. 
32. (EPA), U.S.E.P.A. Seafood Processing Effluent Guidelines. Available from: 
https://www.epa.gov/eg/seafood-processing-effluent-guidelines. 
33. (EPA), U.S.E.P.A. Summary of the Clean Water Act. 2020; Available from: 
https://www.epa.gov/laws-regulations/summary-clean-water-act. 
Text Len: 1273
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
: 
https://www.epa.gov/eg/seafood-processing-effluent-guidelines. 
33. (EPA), U.S.E.P.A. Summary of the Clean Water Act. 2020; Available from: 
https://www.epa.gov/laws-regulations/summary-clean-water-act. 
34. (EPA), U.S.E.P.A. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). 2020; Available 
from: https://www.epa.gov/npdes. 
35. (EPA), U.S.E.P.A. Concentrated Aquatic Animal Production Effluent Guidelines. 2020; Available 
from: https://www.epa.gov/eg/concentrated-aquatic-animal-production-effluent-guidelines. 
36. NPDES Aquaculture Permitting. Available from: www.epa.gov/npdes/npdes-aquaculture-
permitting. 
37. Hopkins, J.S., et al., Environmental impacts of shrimp farming with special reference to the 
situation in the continental United States. Estuaries, 1995. 18(1): p. 25-42. 
38. Galitzine, V., S. Morgan, and J. Harvey, Seafood Watch. FishWise US Farmed Shrimp Report, 2009. 
39. Wildlife, T.P.a., Aquatic Surveys, Introductions, and Relocations: Best Management Practices to 
Prevent or Minimize Aquatic Invasive Species (AIS) Transfer. 
40. Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, D.o.A., Aquaculture Best 
Managment Practices Manual, D.o.A. Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer
Text Len: 1235
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
P.a., Aquatic Surveys, Introductions, and Relocations: Best Management Practices to 
Prevent or Minimize Aquatic Invasive Species (AIS) Transfer. 
40. Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, D.o.A., Aquaculture Best 
Managment Practices Manual, D.o.A. Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer 
Services, Editor. 2016. 
41. Florida Department of Agricultgure and Consumer Services, D.o.A. Penaeid Shrimp Aquaculture: 
Rules and Regulations. Available from: https://www.fdacs.gov/content/download/78926/file/FDACS-P-
01787-Penaeid_Shrimp_Aqua_Rules_Regulations.pdf. 
31 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
42. Center, T.N.A.L. Aquaculture: An Overview. Available from: 
https://nationalaglawcenter.org/overview/aquaculture/. 
43. OIE, Terrestrial Animal Health Code. Chapter 2.1 Import Risk Analysis. 2019. 
44. Pénzes, J.J., et al., Molecular biology and structure of a novel penaeid shrimp densovirus 
elucidate convergent parvoviral host capsid evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 2020. 117(33): p. 20211-20222. 
45. Benson, D.A., et al., GenBank. Nucleic acids research, 2018. 46(D1): p. D41-D47. 
46. Dhar, A.K., et al., Genetic Relatedness of Infectious Hypodermal and Hematopoietic Necrosis 
Virus Isolates, United
Text Len: 1281
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
222. 
45. Benson, D.A., et al., GenBank. Nucleic acids research, 2018. 46(D1): p. D41-D47. 
46. Dhar, A.K., et al., Genetic Relatedness of Infectious Hypodermal and Hematopoietic Necrosis 
Virus Isolates, United States, 2019. Emerging infectious diseases, 2022. 28(2): p. 373. 
47. Tang, K.F. and D.V. Lightner, Low sequence variation among isolates of infectious hypodermal 
and hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV) originating from Hawaii and the Americas. Diseases 
of aquatic organisms, 2002. 49(2): p. 93-97. 
48. Saksmerprome, V., et al., Detection of infectious hypodermal and haematopoietic necrosis virus 
(IHHNV) in farmed Australian Penaeus monodon by PCR analysis and DNA sequencing. 
Aquaculture, 2010. 298(3-4): p. 190-193. 
49. Fajardo, C., et al., Molecular characterization of strains of decapod penstyldensovirus 1 (PstDV1) 
isolated in farmed Litopenaeus vannamei from Venezuela. Aquaculture, 2015. 436: p. 34-39. 
50. Taengchaiyaphum, S., et al., Shrimp Parvovirus Circular DNA Fragments Arise From Both 
Endogenous Viral Elements and the Infecting Virus. Frontiers in immunology, 2021: p. 3979. 
51. Taengchaiyaphum, S., et al., Shrimp genome sequence contains independent clusters of 
ancient and current End
Text Len: 1230
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
um, S., et al., Shrimp Parvovirus Circular DNA Fragments Arise From Both 
Endogenous Viral Elements and the Infecting Virus. Frontiers in immunology, 2021: p. 3979. 
51. Taengchaiyaphum, S., et al., Shrimp genome sequence contains independent clusters of 
ancient and current Endogenous Viral Elements (EVE) of the parvovirus IHHNV. BMC 
genomics, 2022. 23(1): p. 1-12. 
52. Shen, H., W. Zhang, and S. Shao, Phylogenetic and recombination analysis of genomic 
sequences of IHHNV. Journal of Basic Microbiology, 2015. 55(8): p. 1048-1052. 
53. Cowley, J.A., M. Rao, and G.J. Coman, Real-time PCR tests to specifically detect IHHNV 
lineages and an IHHNV EVE integrated in the genome of Penaeus monodon. Diseases of 
aquatic organisms, 2018. 129(2): p. 145-158. 
54. Huerlimann, R., et al., Genome assembly of the Australian black tiger shrimp (Penaeus 
monodon) reveals a novel fragmented IHHNV EVE sequence. G3, 2022. 12(4): p. jkac034. 
55. (OIE), W.O.f.A.H., Aquatic Animal Health Code. 22nd ed. 2019. 
56. Sellars, M., et al., Reduced growth performance of black tiger shrimp (Penaeus monodon) infected 
with infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus. Aquaculture, 2019. 499: p. 160-166. 
57. Hsieh,
Text Len: 1215
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
H., Aquatic Animal Health Code. 22nd ed. 2019. 
56. Sellars, M., et al., Reduced growth performance of black tiger shrimp (Penaeus monodon) infected 
with infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus. Aquaculture, 2019. 499: p. 160-166. 
57. Hsieh, C.Y., et al., Infectious hypodermal and haematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV) infections 
in giant freshwater prawn, Macrobrachium rosenbergii. Aquaculture, 2006. 258(1-4): p. 73-79. 
58. Rai, P., et al., Genomics, molecular epidemiology and diagnostics of infectious hypodermal and 
hematopoietic necrosis virus. Indian Journal of Virology, 2012. 23(2): p. 203-214. 
59. Yuan, Y., et al., PCR detecting types by the OIE standards for infectious hypodermal and 
hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV) in farmed shrimp. Progess in Fishery Sciences, 2015. 
36(1): p. 67-73. 
60. Fan, D., et al., Epidemiology of infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus in 
Macrobrachium rosenbergii. Oceanologia et Limnologia Sinica/Hai Yang Yu Hu Chao, 2015. 
46(5): p. 1153-1159. 
61. Nita, M.H., et al., Detection and genetic profiling of infectious hypodermal and haematopoietic 
necrosis virus (IHHNV) infections in wild berried freshwater prawn, Macrobrachium rosenbergii 
Text Len: 1231
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Yang Yu Hu Chao, 2015. 
46(5): p. 1153-1159. 
61. Nita, M.H., et al., Detection and genetic profiling of infectious hypodermal and haematopoietic 
necrosis virus (IHHNV) infections in wild berried freshwater prawn, Macrobrachium rosenbergii 
collected for hatchery production. Molecular biology reports, 2012. 39(4): p. 3785-3790. 
62. Martorelli, S.R., R.M. Overstreet, and J.A. Jovonovich, First report of viral pathogens WSSV 
and IHHNV in Argentine crustaceans. Bulletin of marine science, 2010. 86(1): p. 117-131. 
63. Chen, B.-K., et al., Iinfectious hypodermal and haematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV) infection 
in freshwater crayfish Procambarus clarkii. Aquaculture, 2017. 477: p. 76-79. 
64. Yang, B., et al., Evidence of existence of infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis 
virus in penaeid shrimp cultured in China. Veterinary microbiology, 2007. 120(1-2): p. 63-70. 
32 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
65. Wei, Y.W., D.D. Fan, and J. Chen, The mussel M ytilus edulis L. as an important reservoir of 
infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV). Aquaculture Research, 2017. 
48(3): p. 1346-1350. 
66. Caipang, C
Text Len: 1173
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 D.D. Fan, and J. Chen, The mussel M ytilus edulis L. as an important reservoir of 
infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV). Aquaculture Research, 2017. 
48(3): p. 1346-1350. 
66. Caipang, C.M.A., M.F.J. Sibonga, and J.S. Geduspan, Rapid detection of the Philippine isolate 
of Infectious Hypodermal and Hematopoietic Necrosis Virus (IHHNV) in shrimp, Penaeus 
monodon using Loop-Mediated isothermal Amplification (LAMP). International Journal of Animal 
and Veterinary Advances, 2012. 4(3): p. 229-234. 
67. Administration, N.O.a.A. White Shrimp. Available from: 
https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/species/white-shrimp. 
68. Base, S. Farfantepenaeus californiensis: yellowleg shrimp. Available from: 
https://www.sealifebase.ca/summary/Farfantepenaeus-californiensis.html. 
69. Paez-Osuna, F. and L. Tron-Mayen, Distribution of heavy metals in tissues of the shrimp 
Penaeus californiensis from the northwest coast of Mexico. Bulletin of Environmental 
Contamination and Toxicology, 1995. 55(2). 
70. Warkentine, B.E. and J.W. Rachlin, The first record of Palaemon macrodactylus (Oriental 
Shrimp) from the eastern coast of North America. Northeastern naturalist, 2010.
Text Len: 1190
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 northwest coast of Mexico. Bulletin of Environmental 
Contamination and Toxicology, 1995. 55(2). 
70. Warkentine, B.E. and J.W. Rachlin, The first record of Palaemon macrodactylus (Oriental 
Shrimp) from the eastern coast of North America. Northeastern naturalist, 2010. 17(1): p. 91-102. 
71. (NOAA), N.O.a.A.A. Pink Shrimp: An Overview. Available from: 
https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/species/pink-shrimp. 
72. (FAO), F.a.A.O.o.t.U.N. Penaeus aztecus. Available from: http://www.fao.org/fishery/species/3400/en. 
73. (FAO), F.a.A.O.o.t.U.N. Penaeus duorarum: Species Fact Sheet. Available from: 
http://www.fao.org/fishery/species/3402/en. 
74. (FAO), F.a.A.O.o.t.U.N. Mytilus edulis: species fact sheets. Available from: 
http://www.fao.org/fishery/species/2688/en. 
75. Muncy, R.J., Species profiles: life histories and environmental requirements of coastal fishes 
and invertebrates (south Atlantic): white shrimp. Vol. 82. 1984: The Service. 
76. Valenzuela-Jiménez, M., et al., North Atlantic white shrimp Litopenaeus setiferus (Decapoda: 
Penaeidae) as an
Text Len: 1064
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, R.J., Species profiles: life histories and environmental requirements of coastal fishes 
and invertebrates (south Atlantic): white shrimp. Vol. 82. 1984: The Service. 
76. Valenzuela-Jiménez, M., et al., North Atlantic white shrimp Litopenaeus setiferus (Decapoda: 
Penaeidae) as an aquaculture target species for farming: a review. Latin american journal of 
aquatic research, 2020. 48(2): p. 167-178. 
77. (USGS), U.S.G.S. Macrobrachium rosenbergii. Available from: 
https://nas.er.usgs.gov/queries/factsheet.aspx?SpeciesID=1203. 
78. (USGS), U.S.G.S., Oreochromis aureus. 
79. (USGS), U.S.G.S. Litopenaeus vannamei. Available from: 
https://nas.er.usgs.gov/queries/factsheet.aspx?SpeciesID=1212. 
80. Survey, U.S.G., Procambarus clarkii. 
81. Base, S. Calliinectes arcuatus: arched swimming crab. Available from: 
https://www.sealifebase.ca/summary/Callinectes-arcuatus.html. 
82. Handbook, E.I.S.M., Penaeus monodon: giant tiger prawn. 
83. Institute, T.I.S., Penaeus monodon: Giant Tiger Prawn. 
84. Portal, M.S.I. Triangle tanner crab (Chionoecetes angulatus). Available from: http://species-

Text Len: 1101
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

82. Handbook, E.I.S.M., Penaeus monodon: giant tiger prawn. 
83. Institute, T.I.S., Penaeus monodon: Giant Tiger Prawn. 
84. Portal, M.S.I. Triangle tanner crab (Chionoecetes angulatus). Available from: http://species-
identification.org/species.php?species_group=crabs_of_japan&id=878. 
85. Species, G.o.C.F.a.O.A. Tanner Crab. Available from: https://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/species-
especes/profiles-profils/tanner-crab-crabe-neiges-pac-eng.html  
86. (MarLIN), T.M.L.I.N. Common mussel (Mytilus edulis). Available from: 
https://www.marlin.ac.uk/species/detail/1421. 
87. Mallet, A.L. and C.E. Carver, Comparative growth and survival patterns of Mytilus trossulus and 
Mytilus edulis in Atlantic Canada. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 1995. 
52(9): p. 1873-1880. 
88. Fishbase. Gerres cinerus (Yellow fin majarra). Available from: https://www.fishbase.de/summary/1054. 
89. Manual of Diagnostic Tests for Aquatic Animals. 2019. 
33 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
90. Tang, K.F., S.A. Navarro, and D.V. Lightner, PCR assay for discriminating between infectious 
hyp
Text Len: 1103
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 from: https://www.fishbase.de/summary/1054. 
89. Manual of Diagnostic Tests for Aquatic Animals. 2019. 
33 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
90. Tang, K.F., S.A. Navarro, and D.V. Lightner, PCR assay for discriminating between infectious 
hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV) and virus-related sequences in the 
genome of Penaeus monodon. Diseases of aquatic organisms, 2007. 74(2): p. 165-170. 
91. Hines, A., et al., Biological invasions of cold-water coastal ecosystems: ballast-mediated 
introductions in Port Valdez/Prince William Sound, Alaska. Final Report to Regional Citizens 
Advisory Council of Prince William Sound, 2000. 340. 
92. Pughiuc, D., Invasive species: Ballast water battles. Seaways, March, 2010: p. 5-7. 
93. Hurley, T., Company Hit with Record Fine for Illegal Ocean Dump, in Honolulu Star-Advisor. 
February 11, 2020. 
94. Whittington, R.J., et al., Counting the dead to determine the source and transmission of the 
marine herpesvirus OsHV-1 in Crassostrea gigas. Veterinary research, 2018. 49(1): p. 34. 
95. Liu, O., et al., Detection of ostreid herpesvirus-1 in plankton and seawater samples at an 
estuary scale. Diseases of Aquatic Organisms, 2020. 138: p. 1-15. 
96. Paul-Pont, I., et al., Experimental infections of Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas using the 
Australian
Text Len: 1336
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. Liu, O., et al., Detection of ostreid herpesvirus-1 in plankton and seawater samples at an 
estuary scale. Diseases of Aquatic Organisms, 2020. 138: p. 1-15. 
96. Paul-Pont, I., et al., Experimental infections of Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas using the 
Australian ostreid herpesvirus-1 (OsHV-1) µVar strain. Diseases of aquatic organisms, 2015. 
113(2): p. 137-147. 
97. Evans, O., I. Paul-Pont, and R.J. Whittington, Detection of ostreid herpesvirus 1 microvariant DNA 
in aquatic invertebrate species, sediment and other samples collected from the Georges River 
estuary, New South Wales, Australia. Diseases of aquatic organisms, 2017. 122(3): p. 247-255. 
98. Lepley, L., et al., Circulation in the northern Gulf of California from orbital photographs and ship 
investigations. Ciencias Marinas, 1975. 2(2): p. 86-93. 
99. Robles-Sikisaka, R., et al., Patterns of Viral Disease Prevalence and Relative Viral Load In Wild 
Penaeid Shrimp. REFUGIO ROBLES-SIKISAKA, 2009. 1050: p. 48. 
100. Information, G.N.a., World maps. 
101. Project, O.B. Ocean Currents Map. Available from: https://oceanblueproject.org/ocean-currents-map/. 
102. Chavez, F.P., et al., The northern Humboldt Current System: Brief history, present status and a 
view towards the future. Progress
Text Len: 1273
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.N.a., World maps. 
101. Project, O.B. Ocean Currents Map. Available from: https://oceanblueproject.org/ocean-currents-map/. 
102. Chavez, F.P., et al., The northern Humboldt Current System: Brief history, present status and a 
view towards the future. Progress in Oceanography, 2008. 
103. Checkley Jr, D.M. and J.A. Barth, Patterns and processes in the California Current System. 
Progress in Oceanography, 2009. 83(1-4): p. 49-64. 
104. Evans, D.L., S.R. Signorini, and L.B. Miranda, A note on the transport of the Brazil Current. 
Journal of Physical Oceanography, 1983. 13(9): p. 1732-1738. 
105. Gyory, J., A.J. Mariano, and E.H. Ryan, The Gulf Stream. Ocean surface currents. RSMAS (Rosenstiel 
School of Marine and Atmospheric Science, the University of Miami): http://oceancurrents. rsmas. 
miami. edu/atlantic/gulf-stream. html (accessed December 30, 2006), 2006. 
106. Lee, T.N., et al., Florida Current meanders and gyre formation in the southern Straits of Florida. 
Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 1995. 100(C5): p. 8607-8620. 
107. Lynn, R.J. and J.J. Simpson, The California Current System: The seasonal variability of its physical 
characteristics. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 1987. 92(C12): p. 12947-12966. 
108. Meinen
Text Len: 1259
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ceans, 1995. 100(C5): p. 8607-8620. 
107. Lynn, R.J. and J.J. Simpson, The California Current System: The seasonal variability of its physical 
characteristics. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 1987. 92(C12): p. 12947-12966. 
108. Meinen, C.S., M.O. Baringer, and R.F. Garcia, Florida Current transport variability: An analysis 
of annual and longer-period signals. Deep Sea Research Part I: Oceanographic Research 
Papers, 2010. 57(7): p. 835-846. 
109. Zhu, Y. and X. Liang, Coupling of the Surface and Near‐Bottom Currents in the Gulf of Mexico. 
Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 2020. 125(11): p. e2020JC016488. 
110. Schaudt, K., et al. A Look at Currents in the Gulf of Mexico in 1999-2000. in Offshore 
Technology Conference. 2001. OnePetro. 
111. Zavala-Hidalgo, J., et al., Seasonal upwelling on the western and southern shelves of the Gulf 
of Mexico. Ocean dynamics, 2006. 56(3): p. 333-338. 
112. AQUACULTURE, J.-J.S.O., An evaluation of potencial shrimp virus impacts on cultured shrimp 
and on wild shrimp populations in the Gulf of Mexico and Southeastern US Atlantic Coastal 
Waters. National Marine Fisheries Service, Washington, 1997. 
113. Miami Aqua-culture, I., Marine Shrimp. 
34 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
114. Hasson, K., et al., White-spot
Text Len: 1303
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 impacts on cultured shrimp 
and on wild shrimp populations in the Gulf of Mexico and Southeastern US Atlantic Coastal 
Waters. National Marine Fisheries Service, Washington, 1997. 
113. Miami Aqua-culture, I., Marine Shrimp. 
34 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
114. Hasson, K., et al., White-spot syndrome virus (WSSV) introduction into the Gulf of Mexico and 
Texas freshwater systems through imported, frozen bait-shrimp. Diseases of Aquatic 
Organisms, 2006. 71(2): p. 91-100. 
115. Lightner, D., et al., Risk of spread of penaeid shrimp viruses in the Americas by the international 
movement of live and frozen shrimp [infectious hypodermal and haematopoietic necrosis, taura 
syndrome, white spot syndrome, yellow head syndrome]. Revue Scientifique et Technique de 
l'OIE (France), 1997. 
116. Krabsetsve, K., B.R. Cullen, and L. Owens, Rediscovery of the Australian strain of infectious 
hypodermal and haematopoietic necrosis virus. Diseases of aquatic organisms, 2004. 61(1-2): 
p. 153-158. 
117. (OIE), W.O.f.A.H. World Animal Health Informatioin Database (WAHIS) Interface. Available 
from: https://www.oie.int/wahis_2/public/wahid.php/Wahidhome/Home. 
118. Reville, C., et al., White spot syndrome virus in frozen shrimp sold at Massachusetts 
supermarkets. Journal of Shellfish Research, 2005. 24(1): p. 285-290. 

Text Len: 1345
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

from: https://www.oie.int/wahis_2/public/wahid.php/Wahidhome/Home. 
118. Reville, C., et al., White spot syndrome virus in frozen shrimp sold at Massachusetts 
supermarkets. Journal of Shellfish Research, 2005. 24(1): p. 285-290. 
119. Prior, S., A. Segars, and C. Browdy, A preliminary assessment of live and frozen bait shrimp as 
indicators and/or vectors for shrimp viruses. Aquaculture, 2001: p. 21-25. 
120. Commission, U.S.I.T. Dataweb. Available from: https://dataweb.usitc.gov/. 
121. Park, S.C., et al., Detection of infectious hypodermal and hematopoietic necrosis virus and 
white spot syndrome virus in whiteleg shrimp (Penaeus vannamei) imported from Vietnam to 
South Korea. Journal of Veterinary Science, 2020. 21(2). 
122. Library, U.S.D.o.A.N.A. Shrimp Aquaculture Project AZ, HI, LA, MA, MS, SC,  and TX. Available 
from: https://www.nal.usda.gov/fsrio/research-projects/shrimp-aquaculture-
projectazhilamamsscand-tx. 
123. Consortium, S.C.S.G. Shrimp Aquaculture: Challenges and Potential. Available from: 
https://www.scseagrant.org/shrimp-aquaculture-challenges-and-potential/   
124. Services, F.D.o.A.a.C. Import/Export Requirements for Aquac
Text Len: 1167
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
123. Consortium, S.C.S.G. Shrimp Aquaculture: Challenges and Potential. Available from: 
https://www.scseagrant.org/shrimp-aquaculture-challenges-and-potential/   
124. Services, F.D.o.A.a.C. Import/Export Requirements for Aquaculture Products. Available from: 
https://www.fdacs.gov/content/download/78858/file/FDACS-P%E2%80%9301785-Import-
Export-Requirements_2019.pdf. 
125. McColl, K., et al., Detection of white spot syndrome virus and yellowhead virus in prawns 
imported into Australia. Australian veterinary journal, 2004. 82(1‐2): p. 69-74. 
126. Ueda, R., K. Krabsetsve, and L. Owens, Polymerase chain reaction detection of Taura Syndrome 
Virus and infectious hypodermal and haematopoietic necrosis virus in frozen commodity tails of 
Penaeus vannamei Boone. Aquaculture Research, 2008. 39(15): p. 1606-1611. 
127. FDA), U.S.D.o.H.H.S.F.a.D.A.H. Code of Federal Regulations Title 21. 2020; Available from: 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?CFRPart=589. 
128. Oidtmann, B., et al., Risk-based methods for fish and terrestrial animal disease surveillance. 
Preventive veterinary medicine, 2013. 112(1-2): p. 13-26. 
Text Len: 1162
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?CFRPart=589. 
128. Oidtmann, B., et al., Risk-based methods for fish and terrestrial animal disease surveillance. 
Preventive veterinary medicine, 2013. 112(1-2): p. 13-26. 
129. Oidtmann, B., et al., Ranking freshwater fish farms for the risk of pathogen introduction and 
spread. Preventive veterinary medicine, 2011. 102(4): p. 329-340. 
130. Soto, M.A., V.R. Shervette, and J.M. Lotz, Transmission of white spot syndrome virus (WSSV) 
to Litopenaeus vannamei from infected cephalothorax, abdomen, or whole shrimp cadaver. 
Diseases of aquatic organisms, 2001. 45(2): p. 81-87. 
131. Islam, M.S., S. Khan, and M. Tanaka, Waste loading in shrimp and fish processing effluents: 
potential source of hazards to the coastal and nearshore environments. Marine pollution 
bulletin, 2004. 49(1-2): p. 103-110. 
132. Agency, E.P. Landfill Effluent Guidelines. Available from: https://www.epa.gov/eg/landfills-
effluent-guidelines. 
133. Agency, U.S.E.P., Municipal Solid Waste Landfills. 2018. 
134. Office, G.P., Code of Fegeral Regulations Title 40 Chapter I Subchapter N Part 445 Landfills 
Point Source Category, E.P. Agency, Editor. 2020. 
35 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
Text Len: 1238
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
133. Agency, U.S.E.P., Municipal Solid Waste Landfills. 2018. 
134. Office, G.P., Code of Fegeral Regulations Title 40 Chapter I Subchapter N Part 445 Landfills 
Point Source Category, E.P. Agency, Editor. 2020. 
35 | Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
 
 
135. Love, D.C., et al., Wasted seafood in the United States: Quantifying loss from production to 
consumption and moving toward solutions. Global Environmental Change, 2015. 35: p. 116-124. 
136. Gunders, D. and J. Bloom, Wasted: How America is losing up to 40 percent of its food from 
farm to fork to landfill. 2017: Natural Resources Defense Council New York. 
137. Garza, J., et al., Demonstration of infectious Taura syndrome virus in the feces of seagulls 
collected during an epizootic in Texas. Journal of Aquatic Animal Health, 1997. 9(2): p. 156-159. 
138. Gerba, C.P., et al., Sources of microbial pathogens in municipal solid waste landfills in the 
United States of America. Waste Management & Research, 2011. 29(8): p. 781-790. 
139. Grisey, E., et al., Survival of pathogenic and indicator organisms in groundwater and landfill leachate 
through coupling bacterial enumeration with tracer tests. Desalination, 2010. 261(1-2): p. 162-168. 
140. Xiang, R., et al., Isolation distance between municipal solid waste landfills and drinking water 
wells for bacteria attenuation and safe drinking. Scientific Reports, 2019. 9(1): p. 1-11. 
141
Text Len: 1421
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 bacterial enumeration with tracer tests. Desalination, 2010. 261(1-2): p. 162-168. 
140. Xiang, R., et al., Isolation distance between municipal solid waste landfills and drinking water 
wells for bacteria attenuation and safe drinking. Scientific Reports, 2019. 9(1): p. 1-11. 
141. Diggles, B., Survey for WSSV vectors in the Moreton Bay White Spot Biosecurity Area. 2020. 
142. Scott-Orr, H., B. Jones, and N. Bhatia, Uncooked prawn imports: effectiveness of biosecurity 
controls. 2017. 
143. Anderson, AZA Giant Pacific Octopus (Enteroctopus dofleini) Care Manual. Associaton of Zoos 
and Aquariums, 2014. 
144. Carl, AZA Japanese Spider Crab (Inachidae/Macrocheira) Care Manual. Association of Zoos 
and Aquariums, 2015. 
145. Casson, AZA Sea Otter (Enhydra lutris) Care Manual. Associaton of Zoos and Aquariums, 2018. 
146. Richman, L.K., et al. A newly recognized fatal baculovirus infection in freshwater crayfish. in 
Proceedings of the American Association of Zoo Veterinarians. 1997. 
147. Wildlife, T.P.a. Fishing with Bait Shrimp. Available from: 
https://tpwd.texas.gov/fishboat/fish/recreational/baitshrimp.phtml#2. 
148. DiStefano, R.J., M.E. Litvan, and P.T. Horner, The bait industry as a potential vector for alien 
cray
Text Len: 1241
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Bait Shrimp. Available from: 
https://tpwd.texas.gov/fishboat/fish/recreational/baitshrimp.phtml#2. 
148. DiStefano, R.J., M.E. Litvan, and P.T. Horner, The bait industry as a potential vector for alien 
crayfish introductions: problem recognition by fisheries agencies and a Missouri evaluation. 
Fisheries, 2009. 34(12): p. 586-597. 
149. Lluch-Cota, S.E., et al., The Gulf of California: review of ecosystem status and sustainability 
challenges. Progress in oceanography, 2007. 73(1): p. 1-26. 
150. Lotz, J., Viruses, biosecurity and specific pathogen-free stocks in shrimp aquaculture. World 
journal of microbiology and biotechnology, 1997. 13(4): p. 405-413. 
151. Bouwmeester, M.M., et al., Collateral diseases: aquaculture impacts on wildlife infections. 
Journal of Applied Ecology, 2021. 58(3): p. 453-464. 
152. Moss, S.M., et al. Disease prevention strategies for penaeid shrimp culture. in Proceedings of the 
Thirty-second US Japan Symposium on Aquaculture. US-japan Coope rative Program in Natural 
Resources (UJNR). US Department of Commerce, NOAA, Silver Spring, MD, USA. 2003. 
153. Samocha, T.M., et al., Management strategies for production of the Atlantic white shrimp 
Penaeus setiferus as bait shrimp in outdoor ponds. Journal of the World Aquaculture Society, 
1998. 29(2): p. 211-220.
Text Len: 1312
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
JNR). US Department of Commerce, NOAA, Silver Spring, MD, USA. 2003. 
153. Samocha, T.M., et al., Management strategies for production of the Atlantic white shrimp 
Penaeus setiferus as bait shrimp in outdoor ponds. Journal of the World Aquaculture Society, 
1998. 29(2): p. 211-220. 
154. Treece, Whiteleg Shrimp Litpenaeus vannamei. 2014, Monteray Bay Aquarium Seafood Watch. 
155. Patoka, J., et al., Invasive aquatic pets: failed policies increase risks of harmful invasions. 
Biodiversity and Conservation, 2018. 27(11): p. 3037-3046. 
156. Food, U. and D. Administration, Strategic Partnership Program Agroterrorism (SPPA) Initiative: 
Final Summary Report, September 2005–September 2008. Silver Spring, MD, 2008: p. 6-7. 
157. USDA, A., Part II. 7 CFR Part 331 and 9 CFR Part 121 Agricultural Bioterrorism Protection Act 
of 2002; Possesion, use, and transfer of biological agents and toxins; final rule. Fed Register, 
2005. 70: p. 13241-13292. 
 
 
Text Len: 957
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
