0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National Plant Diagnostic Network: 2016 Review 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the Review Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
May 2016 
 
 
1 
 
2016 NPDN Review Committee 
 
 
Rick Bennett (Chair) 
Associate Dean for Research 
University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, KY  
 
Casey Sclar 
Executive Director 
American Public Gardens Association 
Kennett Square, PA 
Charla Hollingsworth 
Associate Director 
APHIS-Plant Protection and Quarantine 
Center for Plant Health, Science and Technology 
Raleigh, NC 
 
Robin Shepard 
Executive Director 
NC Association of Extension Directors 
Madison, WI 
 
Doug Luster 
Research Plant Physiologist 
Foreign Disease-Weed Science Research Unit 
USDA-ARS 
Ft. Detrick, Frederick, MD  
 
Anne Vidaver 
Professor Emeritus 
University of Nebraska 
Lincoln, NE 
Tim Murray 
APS President Elect 
Extension Plant Pathologist 
Washington State University 
Pullman, WA 
 
 
 
 
  
2 
 
NPDN 2016 Review Executive Summary 
 
The USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) convened a Review Committee who 
met from March 8 -10, 2016 to conduct a critical review of all facets of the National Plant 
Diagnostic Network (NPDN). The committee met in conjunction with the Fourth  National NPDN 
meeting in Arlington, Virginia on March 8-12, 2016
Text Len: 1279
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
The USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) convened a Review Committee who 
met from March 8 -10, 2016 to conduct a critical review of all facets of the National Plant 
Diagnostic Network (NPDN). The committee met in conjunction with the Fourth  National NPDN 
meeting in Arlington, Virginia on March 8-12, 2016 coordinated by the University of Florida. The 
Review Committee was provided background materials on the mission and history of the NPDN, 
administrative structure, and accomplishments since its inception.  
 
The Review Committee, consisting of professional representatives from major stakeholders, U.S. 
government agencies, and university partners of the NPDN, developed this report after a 
thorough review of the five regional network summaries, t he NPDN committee activity 
summaries, and after  meeting in Arlington with the NPDN Executive Committee and regional 
directors.  Although much of the core of this review came from content and output from the 2016 
national meeting, the basis of this report comes from the NPDN committees that implement the 
plans of work and coordinate the activities within and across regions. Relevant recommendations 
of the 2007 review report were also considered.  
 
This report is divided into six sections following the framew ork established in 2007 , which is 
reflective of the mission, scope, and structure of the NPDN.   In each section, the summary is 
followed by a list of action items with specific recommendations for future improvement of the 
NPDN. The Review Committee did not feel it is necessary to reflect on the history and inception 
of the NPDN since this has been adequately addressed in previous documents.  Instead, the 
Review Committee focused on an analysis of the current state of the NPDN
Text Len: 1792
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 summary is 
followed by a list of action items with specific recommendations for future improvement of the 
NPDN. The Review Committee did not feel it is necessary to reflect on the history and inception 
of the NPDN since this has been adequately addressed in previous documents.  Instead, the 
Review Committee focused on an analysis of the current state of the NPDN and suggestions for 
the future, including areas for improvement.  
 
Key Findings: 
 
The NPDN and its laboratories are considered essential for minimizing destructive pathogens and 
pests of U.S. agriculture. Considering its funding challenges, especially since 2007, the NPDN has 
functioned extremely well, based on a review of its accomplishments including reports, service 
to multiple public and private entities and resulting refereed publications.  
 
Long term funding and sustainability of the NPDN remain a concern by the Review Committee.   
Although the Review Committee does not offer specific funding solutions, the report identifies 
mission areas where funds are needed to support the program and ensure its sustained success.   
 
Succession planning at levels of the executive committee, regional directors and USDA NIFA 
remains a concern. Many of the current regional directors have been with the NPDN from the 
beginning. A succession plan is essential to ensure that these mission-critical positions are a part 
of the ongoing and future operation of the NPDN. The continued stability and functioning of the 
NPDN with its partner institutions should be seamless and follow a well -developed transition 
plan.  
3 
 
 
The NPDN Advisory Council has not been effective  and should be replaced by broad -based 
focused listening groups. These focused listening groups should be composed of representatives 
from the private sector, state/count
Text Len: 1835
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 functioning of the 
NPDN with its partner institutions should be seamless and follow a well -developed transition 
plan.  
3 
 
 
The NPDN Advisory Council has not been effective  and should be replaced by broad -based 
focused listening groups. These focused listening groups should be composed of representatives 
from the private sector, state/county governments and commodity representation to ensure all 
partners and benefactors of the NPDN are represented. 
 
Rapid detection, evaluation and use of new methodology, diagnostics, and early communication 
of disease outbreaks are essential components of the NPDN and  should remain a core mission. 
Training and education of first responders should be incorpora ted into training worksho ps. 
Diagnostic resources should be prioritized among NPDN labs, state and regional labs.   
 
Effective linkages among NPDN labs should include enhanced surge capacity during disease 
outbreaks including an effective mechanism for referral and overload samples when a lab reaches 
capacity.   
 
The NPDN Executive Committee and NIFA National Program Staff should continue to manage the 
NPDN as a cooperative agreement. A competitive funding model for the NPDN and its 
regions/labs would be highly disruptive to the continuity and vitality of the program.  
 
1 
 
 
I. Governance & Funding  
The NPDN was established by the USDA, Cooperative State Research Education and Extension 
Service (USDA CSREES) from federal funds in 2002 to provide increased diagnostic capability to 
the nation’s agricultural system.  
 
The NPDN is administered by an Execu tive Committee and Operations Committee under a 
cooperative agreement with USDA NIFA , which replaced CSREES. 
Text Len: 1713
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 the USDA, Cooperative State Research Education and Extension 
Service (USDA CSREES) from federal funds in 2002 to provide increased diagnostic capability to 
the nation’s agricultural system.  
 
The NPDN is administered by an Execu tive Committee and Operations Committee under a 
cooperative agreement with USDA NIFA , which replaced CSREES.  Initially, the NPDN 
administration was divided among the five regions, each with a separate responsibility.  
Governance was assigned to the Great Plains Diagnostic Network (GPDN), the North Central Plant 
Diagnostic Network (NCPDN) provided oversight for public relations aspects, the Northeast Plant 
Diagnostic Network ( NEPDN) coordinated diagnostics, the Southern Plant Diagnostic Network 
(SPDN) managed training and education and the Western Plant Diagnostic Network ( WPDN) 
managed exercises.  Information technology and data management was led by the National 
Repository. Following the budget reductions in 2011, the Executive Committee decided to focus 
on four areas.  Each of the four areas : Diagnostics, IT Systems, STAR -D Accreditation, and 
Communication were to be a shared responsibility of the regions together.   Committees were 
established to address governance, training and education because ther e was not sufficient 
funding for focused efforts in training and educational materials. Following the enactment of the 
Budget Control Act, a new strategic direction was established to focus on detection, diagnostics 
and reporting (communication).  The strategic planning process is still ongoing.   
 
The NPDN is composed of five regional hubs  with each having unique challenges and regional 
characteristics. They are composed of institutional partners  who vary in their level of 
participation in the region and greater Network. Partners in each region value the current 

Text Len: 1851
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 diagnostics 
and reporting (communication).  The strategic planning process is still ongoing.   
 
The NPDN is composed of five regional hubs  with each having unique challenges and regional 
characteristics. They are composed of institutional partners  who vary in their level of 
participation in the region and greater Network. Partners in each region value the current 
structure and indicate they appreciate the communications, coordination of funding and 
reporting, and opportunities to network and attend  training sessions that each regional hub 
provides. The diagnosticians in each of the labs look forward to regional meetings as an 
opportunity to exchange information, learn new techniques (as some regional meetings also 
have some hands -on diagnostic activ ities) and to network.  Several regions have provided 
additional training for their partners, and the current structure allows new diagnosticians the 
ability to be mentored by established diagnosticians. Several partner labs with specific expertise 
have opened their doors to diagnosticians who seek training on a specific topic. Each partner also 
looks to their regional hub for leadership and guidance with STAR-D, and they appreciate the fact 
that the hub labs have achieved full accreditation or have been thr ough a gap audit. State 
laboratory partners in each region have become embedded within each regional structure, and 
this has led to a sense of community that strengthens the diagnostic efforts within the regions 
and serves as a point of entry into those issues and activities that involve the entire NPDN.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
The NPDN mission statement was recently revised and is currently being vetted pending 
ratification of the NPDN Governance Charter. It states: 
 
The National Plant Diagnostic Network is a premier diagnostic system with the ability to 
quick
Text Len: 1859
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 issues and activities that involve the entire NPDN.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
The NPDN mission statement was recently revised and is currently being vetted pending 
ratification of the NPDN Governance Charter. It states: 
 
The National Plant Diagnostic Network is a premier diagnostic system with the ability to 
quickly detect and accurately identify plant pests and pathogens and to communicate timely 
and accurate information. 
 
 
The mission of the NPDN is based upon national agricultural security . It is charged with rapid 
detection, diagnosis, and early communication of outbreaks of plant pathogens. The Network 
coordinates and communicates with county and state extension agents, state departments of 
agriculture and the USDA, Animal and Plant Health Inspe ction Service, Plant Protection and 
Quarantine (USDA APHIS PPQ) during outbreaks in implementing its mission. Training of first 
responders and diagnosticians is an essential component of the NPDN, ensuring that the Network 
is prepared for the scope of its mission in the event of an outbreak.  The NPDN is a critical 
component of our nation’s biosecurity infrastructure and should serve as a model for other 
nations to emulate. 
 
However, t his new mission statement does not mention training and education. This is  a 
reflection of the reduced funding over the past few years that forced the NPDN to more 
stringently prioritize its objectives. The NPDN Executive Committee is still committed to that 
program element which will be prioritized with diagnostics and communications.  
  
The vision for the NPDN should undergo a strategic planning process and clarify a new statement 
based upon current realities.  That new vision statement should reflect high expectations for 
N
Text Len: 1750
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 to more 
stringently prioritize its objectives. The NPDN Executive Committee is still committed to that 
program element which will be prioritized with diagnostics and communications.  
  
The vision for the NPDN should undergo a strategic planning process and clarify a new statement 
based upon current realities.  That new vision statement should reflect high expectations for 
NPDN, including;  
 Increased recognition for NPDN’s accomplis hments both do mestically and 
internationally 
 Greater accountability for competent and reliable diagnostics from labs with active 
quality management systems in place (STAR-D laboratory accreditation, NPPLAP 
certifications, etc.)  
 Increased global impact thr ough cooperation and outreach programs (funded 
externally). 
 
The NPDN has an Advisory Council that was active for a few years after the NPDN was established. 
They focused on strategic prioritization of efforts and resources.  Its guidance was helpful, 
however in recent years, the Advisory Council has not been effective in the original intent due to 
limitations on participation by industry and commodity stakeholders.  The Advisory Council has 
not been directly and consistently en gaged with the NPDN leadership . Funding to support 
meetings was drastically reduced resulting in few opportunities for face -to-face interactions of 
the Advisory Council . The NPDN could have benefited from input through regular conference 
calls of the Advisory Council.  
 
3 
 
Additionally, t he Advisory Council does not have all of the representation needed to provide 
broader advice to the NPDN  because of FACA restrictions , which do not allow non -federal 
representation. A possible name change and a new charge as a listening or focus group could
Text Len: 1766
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
calls of the Advisory Council.  
 
3 
 
Additionally, t he Advisory Council does not have all of the representation needed to provide 
broader advice to the NPDN  because of FACA restrictions , which do not allow non -federal 
representation. A possible name change and a new charge as a listening or focus group could 
provide the needed input to the NPDN without violating FACA compliance.  Despite initial 
attempts to more broadly engage private industry, their participation didn’t come to f ruition. 
One approach to greater stakeholder engagement with the NPDN could be regional activities 
such as summits, commodity focus groups or other open meetings. Another approach would be 
to use some survey tool to gauge the knowledge of, interest in , and utility of the NPDN to its 
diverse stakeholders and clients.     
  
Extension and Experiment Station directors at L and Grant Universities play an important role in 
funding and support of diagnostic labs and personnel at their institution.  It is appropriate to 
develop a mechanism to inform and engage Extension and Experiment Station Directors as well 
as leadership at state departments of agriculture and provide updates on the NPDN to increase 
opportunities for their direct engagement. 
 
Succession planning at NPDN remains a concern from the executive director through the regional 
hub director, and through diagnostician levels. A succession process is needed for these critical 
positions and should be part of the ongoing evolution of the NPDN. It is critical for the stability 
and continued functioning of the NPDN and its partner institutions to have a succession plan.  
Transitions should be seamless and new diagnosticians should be welcomed by the regional 
network of current experienced dia gnosticians and
Text Len: 1792
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 is needed for these critical 
positions and should be part of the ongoing evolution of the NPDN. It is critical for the stability 
and continued functioning of the NPDN and its partner institutions to have a succession plan.  
Transitions should be seamless and new diagnosticians should be welcomed by the regional 
network of current experienced dia gnosticians and be provided access to expertise and 
assistance. New Regional Directors should be embedded into a collegial and functional Executive 
Committee.   
 
Succession planning at the National Program Leader level at NIFA is also a concern. Development 
of the NPDN has greatly benefited from interaction and programmatic participation by its current 
NIFA National Program Leader (NPL). The NPDN requires administrative oversight by the granting 
agency under the guidance of a knowledgeable and engaged NPL r epresentative to ensure a 
smooth transition during leadership changes. The Review Committee strongly encourages NIFA 
to promptly designate an NPL to provide administrative oversight with upcoming  personnel 
changes on the National Program Staff. Specifically, it is recommended that an NPL be identified 
with strong program leadership, as well as technical and programmatic skills.  
 
The review committee is pleased to note that an effective governance structure has been in place 
since its inception and that the Network is still capable of identifying and responding to plant 
pathogens in th e food and agricultural production system in the face of severe reductions in 
funding. The NPDN has maintained support for diagnostic clinics/laboratories in all 50 states plus 
Puerto Rico, Guam, and American Samoa, while instituting new training and accreditation and 
certification programs for procedures and personnel . This has been partially accomplished by  
leveraging of state and federal dollars .  It is also evident that the Regional
Text Len: 1922
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

funding. The NPDN has maintained support for diagnostic clinics/laboratories in all 50 states plus 
Puerto Rico, Guam, and American Samoa, while instituting new training and accreditation and 
certification programs for procedures and personnel . This has been partially accomplished by  
leveraging of state and federal dollars .  It is also evident that the Regional Directors comprising 
the Executive Committee maintain a true spirit of teamwork  both within and across all regions 
and have established effective working relationships with member Land Grant Universities, State 
Departments of Agriculture and USDA- APHIS. 
4 
 
 
Managing and pre -planning for diagnostic sample surge capacity is still a challenge across and 
within all regions. It was noted that no consistent performance matrix has been established that 
would assist regional coordinators to benchmark respective diagnostic clinics and allow them to 
prioritize selective equipment upgrades. Limited means exist to capture and communicate NPDN   
performance in order to document effectiveness and prove its value to all commodities and 
significant stakeholders.  
 
Funds to support the NPDN are allocated from the Food and Ag Defense Initiative (FADI) through 
NIFA beginning in 2004. Funding peaked in 2010 and then began a steady decline in 2011. These 
cuts in federal funding led the Executive Committee and laboratories to redefine and narrow the 
scope and mission of the NPDN.   Despite this challenge, NPDN has been able to modify their 
approach and deliver a program that assures support for a diagnostic presence in every state , 
although further cuts could have drastic consequences to our national agricultural system.  
 
The need to increase base funding for all regions was recognized as a major ch allenge with 
decreasing federal budgets.  There is a need to insure that effic
Text Len: 1876
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 has been able to modify their 
approach and deliver a program that assures support for a diagnostic presence in every state , 
although further cuts could have drastic consequences to our national agricultural system.  
 
The need to increase base funding for all regions was recognized as a major ch allenge with 
decreasing federal budgets.  There is a need to insure that efficiencies in funding (especially 
supplemental funding) flow are operating in all regions so that individual labs are not left with 
unreimbursed diagnostic costs or funding shortfalls.  It has been suggested that not all states are 
treated equitably relative to funding perhaps as a result of the number of states in a given region 
or differences in operations between “hub” institutions.  
 
It was recognized that there are significant opportunities to expand linkages with state 
departments of agriculture, state agriculture and environmental regulatory officials, co unty 
extension educators/agents and certified crop and nursery consultants.  Efficient leveraging of 
resources with appropriate state agencies, non-government organizations ( NGOs) and 
national/state commodity organizations should continue to be a high prio rity for all regional 
networks. The regional IPM Centers should become a formal part of the communication linkage 
and also search for leveraging grants and special pathogen appropriations.  Laboratories should 
seek applicable certifications and accreditatio ns as a means to document and improve staff 
capabilities, promote efficient utilization of equipment and facilities, and prove they continue to 
meet producer and customer needs.  
 
Recommendations 
 a. Action Items 
 The current NPDN Advisory Council has not been effective because of FACA compliance 
requirements, which prevents non -federal representation on advisory boards . The 
Review Team strongly recommends the establishment of a broad -based N
Text Len: 1934
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 facilities, and prove they continue to 
meet producer and customer needs.  
 
Recommendations 
 a. Action Items 
 The current NPDN Advisory Council has not been effective because of FACA compliance 
requirements, which prevents non -federal representation on advisory boards . The 
Review Team strongly recommends the establishment of a broad -based NPDN focus or 
listening group at both the national and regional lev el, to include representatives from 
the private sector, state/county extension, experiment station/research faculty, CCAs, 
state/federal regulatory agencies and National Plant Board (NPB) affiliates. It is especially 
important to include " industry" and NAH LN representation on the Advisory Board for 
5 
 
exchange of ideas on business practices and governance strategies.  A possible name 
change and new charge to a non -advisory role as a listening group or focus group could 
provide the needed input to the NPDN without violating FACA compliance.    
 The NPDN Executive Committee should complete development of a Strategic Plan for the 
next five years of the NPDN which establishes and identifies milestones for all aspects of 
the Network currently covered by NPDN subcommit tees and prioritize them contingent 
on funding.  
 As part of the strategic plan, a framework and process for annual self -evaluation should 
be developed that will help focus efforts on strengthening and measuring key activities. 
It should i nclude common reporting topics and formats  across all regions , and develop 
metrics for recording and reporting performance. 
 Improve identification and c oordination for recognizing labs with surge capacity in 
identification and sample processing of specific pathogens.  
 Build a succession plan to efficiently
Text Len: 1774
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 focus efforts on strengthening and measuring key activities. 
It should i nclude common reporting topics and formats  across all regions , and develop 
metrics for recording and reporting performance. 
 Improve identification and c oordination for recognizing labs with surge capacity in 
identification and sample processing of specific pathogens.  
 Build a succession plan to efficiently transfer leadership responsibilities at the regional 
and national level.  
 Develop a new vision statement that reflects the high expectations for NPDN’s continued 
success. 
 
 b. Specific Recommendations 
 Evaluate the basi s for formula  funding and practice transparency in annual funding 
allocations from national to regional to State Labs/ Clinics. Improve accounting and 
timeliness in annual funding flow and reporting to/from each of these units as well.  
 The current NPDN Advisory Council should be broadened by a newly formed focus group 
or interest group that complies with FACA requirements . This new body should be 
focused on strategic prioritization of efforts and resources. To ensure broader views and 
representation, the network directors should encourage this group to engage industry 
leaders and stakeholders in regional activities such as summits or other open meetings 
for face-to-face interactions and regular conference calls.  
 The network directors should develop a mechanism to inform and engage Extension and 
Experiment Station Directors as well as state departments of agriculture to provide 
updates on the Network and to provide an opportunity to discuss the NPDN.  
 The review committee recommends that a succession pl an be developed for the 
Executive Director, Regional Directors and the NIFA NPL responsible for the NPDN.  
University extension and research administrators could play an important role in short 
Text Len: 1859
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 state departments of agriculture to provide 
updates on the Network and to provide an opportunity to discuss the NPDN.  
 The review committee recommends that a succession pl an be developed for the 
Executive Director, Regional Directors and the NIFA NPL responsible for the NPDN.  
University extension and research administrators could play an important role in short 
term funding and support of labs at their institution if greater awareness of the scope and 
needs of NPDN labs was brought to their attention. 
 NPDN Executive Committee and NIFA National Program Staff should continue to manage 
the NPDN as a n ongoing cooperative agreement. A competitive funding model for the 
NPDN and its regions/labs would be highly disruptive to the continuity and vitality of the 
program.  
 Regarding surge capacity, the review committee encourages NPDN diagnosticians to 
receive training offered by APHIS PPQ on high consequence pathogens and p ests so that 
representative labs are prepared to assist during outbreaks of known agents.  Since 
6 
 
potential pests may be undefined and broad ranging, complicating issues should be 
addressed beforehand such as maintaining sample integrity and chain of custody  for 
shipping large numbers of samples long distances.  
 Develop a survey tool to gauge the interest of diverse stakeholders and to determine long 
and short-term plans for labs and personnel at each diagnostic lab institution.  
 New vision and mission statements should be more visible on the NPDN website.  
 Consider adding a new committee to address “Surveillance” issues, including interaction 
of NPDN labs in partnerships with IPM -PIPE components and with USDA APHIS CAPS 
programs. 

Text Len: 1714
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 lab institution.  
 New vision and mission statements should be more visible on the NPDN website.  
 Consider adding a new committee to address “Surveillance” issues, including interaction 
of NPDN labs in partnerships with IPM -PIPE components and with USDA APHIS CAPS 
programs. 
 Complete a five -year strategi c plan focused on core components such as marketing, 
incorporating recommendations from the Public Relations and Outreach Review (below) 
and also focus on documenting and measuring effectiveness, prioritizing resources, and 
building the governance and internal communication infrastructure needed to support 
diagnostics and ensure the NPDN’s continued success.  
 
II. Diagnostics  
Since its inception in 2003, the Diagnostics Committee has focused on communications among 
diagnosticians, acquisition of USDA permits, creating standard operating procedures for 
diagnosis of regulated pathogens, coordinating select agent workshops and laboratory surge 
capacity, developing a workshop on basic techniques for diagnosticians, and establishi ng and 
implementing the STAR-D lab accreditation program. The Diagnostics Committee has initiated a 
conversation with the NPDN Database Committee to address concerns expressed at the 2015 
Diagnosticians/IT meeting on the use of diagnostic confidence levels, which resulted in formation 
of an ad hoc sub-committee that was charged with surveying members on the use of diagnostic 
confidence levels. Results of that survey were presented at the 2016 NPDN national meeting.  
The Diagnostics Committee also collected data on surge capacity from every state to identify the 
resources available to handle a surge in sample volume that might occur in the event a select 
agent was found. The committee plans to update this survey, although it’s not stated
Text Len: 1819
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 diagnostic 
confidence levels. Results of that survey were presented at the 2016 NPDN national meeting.  
The Diagnostics Committee also collected data on surge capacity from every state to identify the 
resources available to handle a surge in sample volume that might occur in the event a select 
agent was found. The committee plans to update this survey, although it’s not stated when that 
will occur. 
 
The National Plant Protection Laboratory Accreditation Program (NPPLAP) accredits laboratories 
across the U.S. with the goal of increasing national diagnostic capacity and ensuring lab capability 
in delivering accurate diagnostic determinations for USDA regulatory purposes.  Several NPDN 
labs have achieved and are successfully maintaining NPPLAP accreditations. Likewise, STAR -D, a 
quality management system developed by NPDN is being practiced in an increasing number of 
NPDN labs. Scientists selected from N PDN labs are trained in audit procedures for STAR -D. This 
group continues to grow, ensuring the ability to support lab audits across the network. This effort, 
much like NPPLAP accreditation, is gaining traction with NPDN labs as more diagnosticians 
understand the value of not only accreditation, but the benefits of using a quality management 
system. There is value added to the STAR -D implementation through increased collaboration 
among Network labs, recognized standardization amongst peers, and strengthened  quality 
assurance and control of network collected data. The International Organization of Standards 
7 
 
(ISO) 13484 is expected to be approved in the future and will offer an intermediary quality 
standard for NPDN labs that have an interest in achieving ISO or STAR-D accreditation. The ISO 
13484 standard is the first standard put forward through ISO that specifically addresses plant 
pathogen testing using molecular
Text Len: 1875
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. The International Organization of Standards 
7 
 
(ISO) 13484 is expected to be approved in the future and will offer an intermediary quality 
standard for NPDN labs that have an interest in achieving ISO or STAR-D accreditation. The ISO 
13484 standard is the first standard put forward through ISO that specifically addresses plant 
pathogen testing using molecular biomarkers, and the process as initiated by the NPPLAP opens 
the door for the NPDN to additiona lly use the ISO process as a means for introducing technical 
protocols to be shared at an international level. 
 
The APHIS National Identification Services (NIS) and NPDN labs have worked to preserve sensitive 
information and to communicate needed informati on regarding samples in a timely manner. 
When suspect positive samples are confirmed by the CPHST-Beltsville Lab, state government and 
local PPQ have teamed together with the support of NPDN to delimit the pathogen and rapidly 
respond to pathogen/disease establishment. Surge capacity has increased for regulatory samples 
with additional NPDN labs becoming NPPLAP accredited. Surge control efforts for non-regulatory 
samples are unknown, although in principle, high-throughput platforms in several NPDN labs will 
support processing of greater numbers of processed samples. Establishing and organizing surge 
potential in advance of an emergency is extremely beneficial and should be pursued.  
 
Recommendations  
a. Action items 
 Develop a comprehensive accreditation and certification process for NPDN that 
identifies minimum standards for accreditation. The quality management system 
should meet NPPLAP accreditation criteria. It may be necessary to identify specific 
levels of accreditation in a quality assurance/quality management system. It is also 

Text Len: 1796
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Recommendations  
a. Action items 
 Develop a comprehensive accreditation and certification process for NPDN that 
identifies minimum standards for accreditation. The quality management system 
should meet NPPLAP accreditation criteria. It may be necessary to identify specific 
levels of accreditation in a quality assurance/quality management system. It is also 
necessary to clarify  how to obtain and distribute the resources needed to attain and 
retain the levels of quality assurance required for accreditation.  
 Establish data and practices for monitoring of laboratory workload against lab capacity 
and develop a referral process for samples to effectively utilize the capacity of the 
Network in the event of a surge.  
 Work with APHIS to establish a policy of rapid relay of confirmatory data and address 
issues of confidentiality of those data.  The review committee recognizes that sample 
status is released by the CPHST-Beltsville Lab to NIS which then passes the information 
to the affected State Plant Regulatory Official (SPRO) and State Plant Health Director 
(SPHD) and others.  As for the SOP itself, it covers everything from the first discovery 
of a pathogen or pest, to the time the final report is relayed to the SPHD and SPRO of 
the state involved, and everything in between. This includes the referral process for 
samples, alterations of protocol for surges, and rapid relay of confirmatory data, all 
done in a way to preserve confidentiality.   The current revision of the SOP is a 
continuation of close coordination between NIS and NPDN. 
 
b. Specific Recommendations 
 Plan effective linkages among the NPDN labs for enhanced surge capacity in a large 
disease outbreak or bioterror event.
Text Len: 1736
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 all 
done in a way to preserve confidentiality.   The current revision of the SOP is a 
continuation of close coordination between NIS and NPDN. 
 
b. Specific Recommendations 
 Plan effective linkages among the NPDN labs for enhanced surge capacity in a large 
disease outbreak or bioterror event. This must include an effective mechanism for 
referral of overload samples when a lab reaches capacity.  NIFA and APHIS PPQ are 
8 
 
involved in the Integrated Consortium of Laboratory Networks (ICLN), a federal effort 
charged to create a cohesive system of labs capable of integrated and coordinated 
responses to support major incidents requiring lab support.  However, since 2007, 
biosecurity has been de-emphasized, limiting the efforts of this recommendation. 
 Continue the close coordination with APHIS PPQ identification services to refine 
Standard Operating Procedures and to improve Quality Assurance Systems.  NPPLAP 
has supported, and benefits from the implementation of STAR -D by NPDN.  A more 
formal agreement between NPDN and PPQ regarding the Planned Deviation system 
would benefit all. 
 Increase coordination with laboratories run by state departments of agriculture. This 
is vitally important to a well-functioning national system of plant diagnostic labs. 
 Better integrate the work of entomologists and weed biologists into  the NPDN 
operation. 
 Implement strategies for every laboratory to meet a high standard of chain-of-custody 
for samples and data, sufficient to support APHIS, state departments of agriculture, 
DHS, and law  enforcement agencies for forensic investigations of  intentional plant 
pest or pathogen introductions
Text Len: 1673
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 weed biologists into  the NPDN 
operation. 
 Implement strategies for every laboratory to meet a high standard of chain-of-custody 
for samples and data, sufficient to support APHIS, state departments of agriculture, 
DHS, and law  enforcement agencies for forensic investigations of  intentional plant 
pest or pathogen introductions.  The STAR-D standard is based on the international 
standard ISO/IEC 17025:2005. This standard provides guidelines for maintaining 
chain-of-custody, document and record traceability, and requirements for 
confidentiality. The accredited lab is audited by thi rd party peers, and uses systems 
expressed by the standard that have been adapted and foster continual improvement 
through customer interaction and periodic self -assessments. As more NPDN labs 
become STAR-D accredited, this recommendation should be addressed more widely. 
 Develop plans to work effectively among NPDN labs and with regional and state 
laboratories to prioritize diagnostic resources and specific disease assays. This should 
include state and APHIS CAPS surveys, as well as other monitoring and enf orcement 
activities. Communication with PPQ and CAP programs is not clear. Each state 
however, is made aware of PPQ’s priority pest list each year and could be doing 
something at the state level that PPQ is not aware. S&T has been working to offer 
specific disease assays to the NPDN and State laboratories. The CPHST Beltsville lab 
has been working collaboratively to identify CAPS pathogen priorities for molecular 
validation. Several of these are in progress but a few have been rolled out to state and 
NPDN l abs. There are currently eight phy
Text Len: 1674
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
T has been working to offer 
specific disease assays to the NPDN and State laboratories. The CPHST Beltsville lab 
has been working collaboratively to identify CAPS pathogen priorities for molecular 
validation. Several of these are in progress but a few have been rolled out to state and 
NPDN l abs. There are currently eight phytoplasmas on the CAPS priority pest lists. 
Phytoplasma screening by qPCR assays have been developed by CPHST Beltsville and 
are offered to NPDN and state diagnostic laboratories. A training session was held at 
CPHST Beltsville in March 2015 in which many NPDN labs participated. 
 Develop better communication and cooperation with NAHLN and with FERN via ICLN 
and e stablish a committee to identify and prioritize diagnostic assays suitable for 
inclusion in the ICLN surge reagents program, and communicate surge capacity and 
deficiencies to the I CLN. I dentify sampling and sample handling issues for  
consideration by the ICLN Working Group on environmental sampling and sampling 
method validation. The committee could also work in parallel to the ICLN efforts with 
reagent suppliers on methods, efficacy and supply availability in surge events. 
9 
 
 Since STAR-D is operational and gaining momentum, it needs to expand its base to 
achieve sustainability. Targeted organizations could include, but are not limited to, 
the National Plant Board, National Clean Plant Network, as well as international 
groups.  
 NPDN will benefit a great deal to have more NPDN labs that are STAR-D accredited. 
 NPDN should consider a National Quality Manager position to further support STAR -
D
Text Len: 1630
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 organizations could include, but are not limited to, 
the National Plant Board, National Clean Plant Network, as well as international 
groups.  
 NPDN will benefit a great deal to have more NPDN labs that are STAR-D accredited. 
 NPDN should consider a National Quality Manager position to further support STAR -
D and support QM efforts across the system.  
 Labs could expand their quality management activitie s to include direct comparisons 
of test results, standardization of instruments and platforms, ring tests, and 
development of non-regulatory proficiency tests. 
 NPDN leaders and members should be more proactive when advocating for federal 
Farm Bill funds. Organization representation from stakeholders in Washington DC will 
raise awareness and support of the need for this lab system and its mission to protect 
American agriculture from losses resulting from pests and disease. 
 Next generation sequencing is being  used domestically and internationally to screen 
for pathogens. This is an important tool that has promise for NPDN labs. The review 
committee supports acquiring appropriate equipment and data sharing across labs. 
 Planned Deviations are used by NPPLAP accredited labs when they have platforms or 
methods that are not described in established, validated Work Instructions. As more 
NPDN labs look to replace their Cepheid thermocyclers, labs need to engage NPPLAP 
for guidance when considering new platforms. Not all real-time PCR instruments are 
created equal, and the timing involved in the shift between platforms is important. It 
is likely that a Planned Deviation will be needed before the equipment can be used for 
regulatory samples. However, the deviation can satisfy all future use by different labs 
for the specific equipment studied. 
  
c
Text Len: 1802
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 new platforms. Not all real-time PCR instruments are 
created equal, and the timing involved in the shift between platforms is important. It 
is likely that a Planned Deviation will be needed before the equipment can be used for 
regulatory samples. However, the deviation can satisfy all future use by different labs 
for the specific equipment studied. 
  
c. Future Issues for Consideration 
 In conjunction with APHIS, determine the feasibility of cooperating with the border 
countries of  Canada and Mexico on methodology and data sharing of pests and  
pathogens of mutual concern. The committee recognizes that information sharing 
could have unintended trade impacts regarding pests and diseases of regulatory 
concern. The NPDN should work closely with PPQ prior to engaging in bi- or tri-lateral 
discussions. 
 
III. Partnerships 
The NPDN has been a model for effective partnerships among local, state and federal agencies 
and organizations. The NPDN’s record of accomplishment in response to the enormous economic 
threats posed by exotic plant pathogens and pests is remarkable due largely to effective 
partnerships with Land Grant University diagnostic laboratories and USDA APHIS expert 
laboratories. These partnerships have resulted in many publications in refereed journals and in 
the validation of newly developed diagnostic protocols.  The NPDN labs have also reinvigorated 
state plant diagnostic labs with improved infrastructure.   
10 
 
 
One example of an effective partnership that had been successful early during the establishment 
of the NPDN bu t has since been less active is the NPDN ’s Exercise Program it conducted with 
USDA APHIS and the National Plant Board (NPB).  Under this program , the NPDN conducted 71 
exercises
Text Len: 1764
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
10 
 
 
One example of an effective partnership that had been successful early during the establishment 
of the NPDN bu t has since been less active is the NPDN ’s Exercise Program it conducted with 
USDA APHIS and the National Plant Board (NPB).  Under this program , the NPDN conducted 71 
exercises prior to 2011, but only four (4) since 2011 due to budget cuts.  Following 2011,  the 
Exercise Committee was merged into a subcommittee of the Training and Education Committee 
and currently meets only intermittently. The ETKnet, developed by the University of Florida SPDN 
Hub, provided some support in 2015 for the Exercise Committee to  meet more regularly and 
assure an update of the exercise protocol, but its long term sustainability is still in doubt.  
 
Implementing the Incident Command System (ICS) structure is another state/federal partnership 
that has been achieved with the NPDN.  In conjunction with APHIS and the NPB, all NPDN labs 
have conducted full scale and functional exercises , but not all NPDN diagnosticians , State Plant 
Health Directors and State Plant Regulatory officials have exercised with the ICS structure again 
due to budget limitations.     
 
Although progress has been made in engaging state and federal regulatory agencies, much 
potential exists in forming additional productive partnerships with stakeholder groups and the 
private sector.   Several st ate and federal partners are also responsible for excluding and 
eradicating regulated plant pests and in most states significant progress has been made in 
improving the level of trust between regulatory agencies and extension and diagnostic personnel. 
However, a greater level of ongoing engagement and communication with commodity groups is 
also necessary to tighten the safeguarding safety net and assure
Text Len: 1813
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 sector.   Several st ate and federal partners are also responsible for excluding and 
eradicating regulated plant pests and in most states significant progress has been made in 
improving the level of trust between regulatory agencies and extension and diagnostic personnel. 
However, a greater level of ongoing engagement and communication with commodity groups is 
also necessary to tighten the safeguarding safety net and assure that responses are rapid and 
accurate. The diagnostic/education/regulatory partnership must recognize the  importance and 
value of business confidentiality, diagnostic challenges, and the need to minimize potential 
threats through quarantines and other restrictions. 
 
One example of a successful commodity/stakeholder partnership is the Sentinel Plant Network 
Program conducted with the American Public Gardens Association. Through it, not only have 
greater resources been obtained for both the NPDN and the Association, but also a vastly 
expanded recognition of the NPDN can be made possible by leveraging professionals at botanic 
gardens themselves, who can promote NPDN to over 100 million visitors to public gardens per 
year, in addition to serving as botanical and surveying/monitoring resources.  Greater awareness 
and use of this partnership can be made by any diagnostic lab. 
 
The NPDN has profited from a commitment to forging strong partnerships between regional and 
state diagnosticians. All five NPDN regions have made great strides in developing strong 
partnerships and providing training for Certified Crop Advisors (CCAs), Pest Control Advisors 
(PCAs), county extension staff, and other first responders. Most prominently, a solid foundation 
for operating NPDN partnerships exists with the Integrated Pest Management (IPM) Center 
Network, inwhich the NPDN has formed formal partnerships in several regions. The successes of 
the Soybean Rust
Text Len: 1907
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
rop Advisors (CCAs), Pest Control Advisors 
(PCAs), county extension staff, and other first responders. Most prominently, a solid foundation 
for operating NPDN partnerships exists with the Integrated Pest Management (IPM) Center 
Network, inwhich the NPDN has formed formal partnerships in several regions. The successes of 
the Soybean Rust Information System, developed in partnerships with the USDA agencies, state 
departments of agriculture, industry partners and the Land Grant Universities, has been 
expanded in the development of the Integrated Pest Management Pest Information Platform for 
11 
 
Extension and Education (IPM-PIPE), a sentinel system and data management decision tool that 
will serve as a model for partnership between the NPDN and most, if not all, interested feder al, 
state and private interests. 
 
Past detections of plant pathogens with regulatory significance have provided an opportunity for 
extension personnel, CCAs, state regulators  and diagnostic clinicians to exercise Incident 
Command System (ICS) structure and maneuvers. Additionally, these incidents have identified  
needed resources and prompted development of sampling and diagnostic mechanisms. The need 
to develop surge capacity has encouraged critical working relationships between scientists and  
administration with the diagnostic labs, State Plant Health Directors (SPHDs), State Plant  
Regulatory Officials (SPROs), APHIS-PPQ Center for Plant Health Science and Technology (CPHST), 
and APHIS -PPQ Plant Pest Diagnostics Service units. These are initial steps toward  a fully  
integrated plant security system that point to the potential partnerships and their ability to 
harness the necessary capacity and imagination to safeguard U.S. agriculture. New potential and 
expected threats or any unexpected organisms may further  challenge existing communication 

Text Len: 1876
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
), 
and APHIS -PPQ Plant Pest Diagnostics Service units. These are initial steps toward  a fully  
integrated plant security system that point to the potential partnerships and their ability to 
harness the necessary capacity and imagination to safeguard U.S. agriculture. New potential and 
expected threats or any unexpected organisms may further  challenge existing communication 
and diagnostic systems.  
 
Partnerships could be more effective by including an industry component. Primarily due to 
concerns about confidentiality or lack of communication, these partnerships have not been 
extensively pursued and developed.  Although resources directed for outreach may be viewed as 
limiting, this does not realize the potential rate of return from awareness.  The CCAs, PCAs, 
representatives of seed, fertilizer, and pesticide manufacturers, scouts/field repres entatives for 
commodity groups and processors and professionals engaged within the horticulture industry all 
work together, giving them unique environmental and pest pressure information. These 
partnerships will not only ultimately lead to earlier detectio n of pests, but allow unique 
communication and response opportunities based on existing levels of trust. 
 
The NPDN’s unique function and focus on plants necessitates different approaches than those of 
the National Animal Health Laboratory Network (NAHLN).  The broad number of potential 
pathogen and pest threats, as well as numerous ports of entry, necessitates more diverse 
approaches and greater field resources for the diagnostic labs of the NPDN.    As a result, the 
NPDN and the NAHLN are structured differen tly and their appro ach to biosecurity are 
contrasting. The NAHLN is very focused on detection and diagnosis of a limited number of high 
consequence threat agents
Text Len: 1816
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
approaches and greater field resources for the diagnostic labs of the NPDN.    As a result, the 
NPDN and the NAHLN are structured differen tly and their appro ach to biosecurity are 
contrasting. The NAHLN is very focused on detection and diagnosis of a limited number of high 
consequence threat agents, while the NPDN’s scope is to protect all plant systems from any 
threat. NAHLN labs are certif ied and NAHLN diagnosticians are proficiency tested to execute 
approved protocols for a limited number of pathogens/threat agents , analogous to the NPDN 
STAR-D and APHIS/PPQ NPPLAP programs.   The NAHLN is operational in select labs in several 
states, while NPDN is operati onal in every U.S. state and it s territories.  The NAHLN is guided 
primarily by APHIS Veterinary Services while the NPDN is funded by agreements with USDA-NIFA 
with APHIS Farm Bill grants supplementing the USDA -NIFA agreements. Even considering these 
structural dissimilarities, there should be opportunities to interact and communicate with the 
NAHLN in laboratory accreditation, proficiency testing, and technology strategies.   More on this 
relationship will be discussed in later sections.      
 
12 
 
Recommendations 
a. Action Items 
 The review committee recommends that NPDN leadership and individual diagnostic 
laboratories seek partnerships with national and state NGOs such as the Farm Bureau, 
commodity groups and  processors, CCAs and  agricultural product producers and  
suppliers that allow for greater stakeholder engagement. The Sentinel Plant Network 
Program partnership is a
Text Len: 1586
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. Action Items 
 The review committee recommends that NPDN leadership and individual diagnostic 
laboratories seek partnerships with national and state NGOs such as the Farm Bureau, 
commodity groups and  processors, CCAs and  agricultural product producers and  
suppliers that allow for greater stakeholder engagement. The Sentinel Plant Network 
Program partnership is a good beginning, but only by holding focus groups and directly 
seeking out the needs of these interest groups will greater resources and recognition 
be obtained. 
 The review committee recommends that the NPDN directors develop a strategy to 
inform and engage Land Grant Extension and Experiment Station Directors as well as 
state departments of agriculture to gain support of network host institutions.   
 Individual NPDN  laboratories should establish and/or strengthen the partnerships 
with SPROs, SPHDs and natural resource agencies. 
 The NPDN Exercise Program and the Incident Command System should be 
reinvigorated to facilitate the establishment and maintenance of relationships among 
NPDN, state and federal staff involved in plant health emergencies.  USDA-NIFA should 
consider this a high priority for increased supplemental funding. 
 
 b. Specific Recommendations 
 NPDN leadership should seek partnerships with  those federal agencies who se 
missions involve land or resource management or plant pest regulations. 
 NPDN leadership should establish a communication link with the NAHLN and consider 
opportunities to communicate and exchange information with the NAHLN in 
laboratory accreditation, proficiency testing, and technology strategies. One option is 
to have an  NAHLN representative seat on the Advisory Board (or its replacement 
entity) for NPDN and vice versa for exchange of ideas or business practices. 
�
Text Len: 1824
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HLN and consider 
opportunities to communicate and exchange information with the NAHLN in 
laboratory accreditation, proficiency testing, and technology strategies. One option is 
to have an  NAHLN representative seat on the Advisory Board (or its replacement 
entity) for NPDN and vice versa for exchange of ideas or business practices. 
 As available,  individual state diagnostic laboratories should establish partnerships 
with non- traditional cooperators such as Historically Black Colleges and Universities, 
Tribal Nations, and private land managers. 
 NPDN laboratories should identify roles, responsibilities, and measures of success 
with partners and establish mechanisms to share data, as well as investigational and 
analytical information. NPDN should further identify international standards which 
provide guidelines for these practices including those available by ISO, Codex, IPPC, 
AAVLD, and RPPOs. This can be  facilitated by developing and implementing MOUs 
with key partners. 
 NPDN laboratories should develop and implement additional ICS preparedness 
scenarios in coope ration with key partners to  improve communication, enhance 
readiness and engage mutually available diagnostics. Varying the size of scenarios in 
regional, state, and  local locations and  cropping systems will  challenge different 
resources and personnel. 
 NPDN should strengthen partnerships with  industry and professional associations 
such as the American Phytopathological Society (APS), the American Public Gardens 
Association, AmericanHort, the  California Association of Pest Control Advisors, the 
13 
 
American Farm Bureau and others to increase recognition and awareness of its crucial 
work.  Consideration should be given to enhance the Sentinel Plant Network Program.  
�
Text Len: 1794
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 as the American Phytopathological Society (APS), the American Public Gardens 
Association, AmericanHort, the  California Association of Pest Control Advisors, the 
13 
 
American Farm Bureau and others to increase recognition and awareness of its crucial 
work.  Consideration should be given to enhance the Sentinel Plant Network Program.  
 NPDN should plan engagement activities with stakeholders such as focus groups, 
periodic summits, or other open meetings to gain and exchange information.  
 Representatives of stakeholder  organizations should be considered for membership 
on the NPDN Advisory Board (or its replacement entity).  
 The NPDN should consider strengthening communications with the National Seed 
Health System to increase the Network’s role in seed-related issues. 
 
IV. Public Relations and Outreach 
The NPDN has engaged in structured public relations efforts since its inception and has 
established a Public Relations Committee, which has been less active in recent years due to 
budget constraints. Efforts have included the development of a variety of promotional print and 
electronic materials, highlighting national and regional activities, laboratory capacity and disease-
specific information. National and regional newsletters, brochures, and websites have been 
effectively deployed to distribute information. In a notable example of outreach activities, NPDN 
partnered very effectively with several commodity groups, and USDA agencies to develop 
effective materials on field crop pathogen identification and management as well as ornamental 
plant pathogens and diseases. The NPDN websites provide qualit y information on new disease 
issues and outbreaks in a user-friendly interface (http://www.NPDN.org, (http://www.NPDN.org; 
https://firstdetector.org/; http://www.protect
Text Len: 1822
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 crop pathogen identification and management as well as ornamental 
plant pathogens and diseases. The NPDN websites provide qualit y information on new disease 
issues and outbreaks in a user-friendly interface (http://www.NPDN.org, (http://www.NPDN.org; 
https://firstdetector.org/; http://www.protectingusnow.org/, sentinel plant network 
(www.sentinelplantnetwork.org), www.npdn-spn.org).  
 
Despite years of continuous effort, some potential partners and stakeholders are still not 
knowledgeable about the NPDN mission and activities. Additionally, as previously stated, a top 
priority must be to further educate commodity groups, private industry and other plant industry 
stakeholders on the mission, scope and activities of the NPDN, and engage them as partners. 
There is a lack of brand awareness, both of the NPDN itself, and of its products. Although there 
is a brand logo and identity, it must be focused into a plan with communication goals. The NPDN 
should develop a formal public relations strategy, with strategic goals at the national, regional 
and state levels.   It is imperative that state, regional and national NPDN members identify and 
engage new audiences, while sustaining the interest of existing partners and stakeholders. For 
example, not all University administrators currently view the NPDN as an entity that is 
contributing to their current strategic goals.  
 
The NPDN has had a complicated relationship with state departments of agriculture (SDA).  
Extension and regulatory missions are not always the same and Extension needs for diagnostic 
methods and specificity of identification are often different.  Some diagnosticians and 
administrators in SDAs perceive N
Text Len: 1709
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 is 
contributing to their current strategic goals.  
 
The NPDN has had a complicated relationship with state departments of agriculture (SDA).  
Extension and regulatory missions are not always the same and Extension needs for diagnostic 
methods and specificity of identification are often different.  Some diagnosticians and 
administrators in SDAs perceive NPDN labs as a parallel effort, and some state diagnosticians do 
not grasp how they could interact with their NPDN cohorts.   
14 
 
Recommendations 
 a. Action Items 
 Develop a formal public relations strategic plan with goals at the national, regional and 
state levels. Consider public relations more broadly in websites, newsletters, and 
interactions with groups.  Identify target audiences for the strategy and for 
distribution, and prioritize audiences such as Land Grant University administrators, 
and State Plant Health Directors. This plan should contain measurable elements that 
define what successful execution looks like, as well as a programmatic brand review 
that identifies strong as well as repetitive brands that exist within NPDN.  
 Diagnosticians in each laboratory should engage in regional meetings,  focus groups, 
open houses and visits by stakeholders to diagnostic clinics on a rotating basis. These 
visits should be tracked by NPDN as evidence that outreach is taking place at an 
increased rate.  
 Improve access, search capability and content on the website(s), especially publicly 
accessible in formation and training materials for stakeholders (including but not 
limited to producers, c rop advisors, first detectors, and green industry/commodity 
professionals. Websites may need to be consolidated, re-organized, or co-branded to 
ensure that NPDN is best identified as
Text Len: 1778
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and content on the website(s), especially publicly 
accessible in formation and training materials for stakeholders (including but not 
limited to producers, c rop advisors, first detectors, and green industry/commodity 
professionals. Websites may need to be consolidated, re-organized, or co-branded to 
ensure that NPDN is best identified as the source of these valuable programs.  
 The NPDN leadership and Public Relations Committee should develop a framework 
and process for annual self-evaluation that will help to focus strengthening activities, 
including reporting topics and formats, and metrics for recordi ng and reporting 
performance. 
 NPDN laboratories in states where there is no Land Grant University, should 
strengthen partnerships with SDAs as partner labs and interact with the SDAs in 
regional meetings and trainings.    
 
 b. Specific Recommendations 
 Expand professional outreach by organizing annual town hall meetings and providing 
booths, di splays, and information at venues such as at annual  meetings of the 
American Phytopathological Society, the American Public Gardens Association, 
AmericanHort, t he National Plant Board, National Association of state Departments 
of Ag riculture, Partners in Community Forestry, and  the North American Plant 
Protection Organization. 
 Identify key agricultural legislators in each state and develop plans to educate them 
via the NPDN partners in that state on local, regional and national accomplishments 
and needs. Consider inviting State legislative and Congressional staff to diagnostic 
labs or meeting them at disease impact sites for awareness building. 
 Develop and disseminate communications toolkits that diagnosticians can use to 
introduce/promote the NPDN in their outreach efforts
Text Len: 1782
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
via the NPDN partners in that state on local, regional and national accomplishments 
and needs. Consider inviting State legislative and Congressional staff to diagnostic 
labs or meeting them at disease impact sites for awareness building. 
 Develop and disseminate communications toolkits that diagnosticians can use to 
introduce/promote the NPDN in their outreach efforts. 
 Consolidate website presence and make tools available to constituents in an 
organized and brand-identifiable fashion based on results of PR strategic plan 
 Adopt a formal, structured annual reporting system for NPDN labs at the local/state 
and national levels. Ideally, it could include short statements of accomplishment that 
can be di sseminated to various audience s. Develop “Points of  Progress” for 
15 
 
communication at the state and regional levels for Experiment Station Directors, 
SPROs, and USDA agencies. 
 Publish more of the diagnostic laboratories output in scientific journals. Consider 
publishing pathogen diagnostic standard operating procedures and ring-test results in 
easily accessible journals such as those in the Plant Health Management Network. 
 
V. Training & Education  
The mission of the NPDN Training & Education Committee (TEC) is to provide general leadership, 
guidelines and direction for the national First Detector training program. This mission is 
accomplished by developing materials in several formats to facilitate the work of First Detectors 
and First Detector educators. All NPDN materials are available online at www.firstdetector.org. 
The 2007 review indicates that from its or igins, education and training w ere stated goals of the 
NPDN and an important infrastructure was built: “A vast network of first responders has been 
developed
Text Len: 1777
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 facilitate the work of First Detectors 
and First Detector educators. All NPDN materials are available online at www.firstdetector.org. 
The 2007 review indicates that from its or igins, education and training w ere stated goals of the 
NPDN and an important infrastructure was built: “A vast network of first responders has been 
developed and is rapidly expanding down to the local level, fulfilling one of the primary visions 
of the network.” Training is a primary focus of the Network and is accomplished at the national, 
regional and state level with effectiveness, applying a “train -the-trainer” philosophy. Online 
scenario-based training has been implemented with online access, and Standard Operating 
Procedures are in place on the internet for open access. 
 
Overall, the TEC has been very successful in addressing its core mission of training “First 
Detectors.” Since its inception in 2003, an estimated 16,000+ participants have received face-to-
face training across a broad variety of commodities, and this likely under -represents the total 
number of participants since many sessions were not recorded in the database. An e -learning 
module program was implemented in 2009 and nearly 5,000 participants have viewed over 
23,000 trai ning modules including those registering through other partner sites including the 
NPDN training gateway, Protect US  (a partnership with the Regional IPM Centers) , and the 
Sentinel Plant Network (a partnership with the American Public Gardens Association). In addition, 
training has occurred in 22 countries worldwide.    
 
The mission of the TEC is defined in the context of serving First Detectors and First Detector 
educators only, and does not explicitly address the needs of diagnosticians themselves. However, 
Text Len: 1780
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and the 
Sentinel Plant Network (a partnership with the American Public Gardens Association). In addition, 
training has occurred in 22 countries worldwide.    
 
The mission of the TEC is defined in the context of serving First Detectors and First Detector 
educators only, and does not explicitly address the needs of diagnosticians themselves. However, 
diagnosticians and other professionals involved with the NPDN do receive training in places such 
as at specialized workshops offered annually by USDA -PPQ CPHST-Beltsville on specific topics 
related to diagnosis and identification of plant pathogens  of regulatory significance as well as 
other key topics.  These are valuable training sessions outside the scope of that offered for First 
Detectors and not limited to compliance trainings such as that for STAR-D, but not mentioned in 
the TEC report specifically. 
 
Extensive budget reductions occurred in 2010, and for the education focus to continue, 
extramural funding was obtained. Collaborations with Protect US and the Sentinel Plant Network 
provided additional funding through the Farm Bill (10201) and resulted in a suite of tools (e.g. e-
learning modules, interpretation, and scouting guides, etc.) for identification of high 
16 
 
consequence pests and pathogens housed at www.firstdetector.org, and advanced taxonomic 
training videos, which are housed on the YouTube site, www.youtube.con/user/npdnchannel. 
Current partners listed on the www.firstdetector.org site include USDA -APHIS, Regional IPM 
Centers, the CAPS program, the National Plant Board and the State Departments of Agriculture, 
EDEN, the Center for Ecosystem Species and Health (Bugwood), the Community Invasive Species 
Network (Protect US), and the
Text Len: 1748
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
pdnchannel. 
Current partners listed on the www.firstdetector.org site include USDA -APHIS, Regional IPM 
Centers, the CAPS program, the National Plant Board and the State Departments of Agriculture, 
EDEN, the Center for Ecosystem Species and Health (Bugwood), the Community Invasive Species 
Network (Protect US), and the Sentinel Plant Network. 
 
The training and education programs of the TEC were very successful in raising the initial visibility 
and awareness of the NPDN and the importance of plant biosecurity to the general public from 
2003 until the 2010 budget reduction. Nearly 5,000 First Detectors have been trained since 2009 
when the e-learning platform was implemented and although it has been successful, it is not a 
replacement for face -to-face training. Given new funds, First Detector training should be 
reemphasized by both face-to-face and electronic means. Branded training materials should also 
be updated as needed. Although efforts were made to raise the visibility of the First Detector 
network and NPDN on social media, the impact of this effort is unclear. 
 
The learning gateway established at www.firstdetector.org serves to direct users to its many 
different resources. However, because it has lacked one consistent programmatic source of 
dedicated funding, decisions on the look and interactivity of the we bsite will need attention. 
Many collaborators have been involved, and the First Detector program seems to be split 
between gaining resources by collaboration, and retaining its own brand presence. 
 
The use of “First Detector” is a strong brand positioning statement for NPDN, and it should be 
retained, although having this wrapped in a strong communications / public relations plan would 
eluc
Text Len: 1752
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 have been involved, and the First Detector program seems to be split 
between gaining resources by collaboration, and retaining its own brand presence. 
 
The use of “First Detector” is a strong brand positioning statement for NPDN, and it should be 
retained, although having this wrapped in a strong communications / public relations plan would 
elucidate which social media streams (if any) should be retained. A communication specialist 
should be retained to make recommendations for improving TEC activities. 
 
Recommendations  
a. Action Items  
 First detector training should be incorporated into Certified Crop Adviser training 
workshops with CCA continuing education credits being approved for the NPDN core 
e-learning modules. In 2009, NPDN created and launched e -learning modules which 
provided an opportunity for asynchronous learning. 
 Establish new and continue to sustain partnerships that support and leverage NPDN 
and First Detector materials. 
 Invest in a central information sharing hub and house regional and central training 
resources in one location under an NPDN or First Detector Umbrella. Unify education 
and training across all regions and platforms to better support the NPDN and the First 
Detector network. 
 Survey audience s to determine utility and potential resource overlap with other 
programs and develop new content that seeks to serve a unique audience  
17 
 
b. Specific Recommendations 
 Expand first detector training to encompass Master Gardeners, CCAs, crop 
consultants, and other agribusiness professionals. Substantial progress was made from 
2007-2010 in expanding First Detector training primarily with the implementation of 
e-learning modules beginning in 2009. More recently, the NPDN YouTube channel
Text Len: 1770
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

b. Specific Recommendations 
 Expand first detector training to encompass Master Gardeners, CCAs, crop 
consultants, and other agribusiness professionals. Substantial progress was made from 
2007-2010 in expanding First Detector training primarily with the implementation of 
e-learning modules beginning in 2009. More recently, the NPDN YouTube channel was 
expanded and it hosts First Detector training materials  and advanced taxonomic 
resources mostly used for internal NPDN training purposes. TEC activities expanded 
their presence in social media including Facebook and Twitter, and First Detector 
training and resources were promoted through the Sentinel Plant Network  and First 
Detector newsletter. Some of these activities were curtailed in 2010 following a 
substantial budget reduction. 
 Expand the current initiative on Incident Command System training to all regions. 
 Continue to develop, expand and refine online traini ng tools and update and expand 
the e-learning system through expanded collaborations.  
 Establish Training and Education Committees in all regions. 
 Develop and provide certifications and  certification programs for various types of  
training. The committee recognizes that a certification for completing First Detector 
training has been developed and a receipt of credit in CCA -approved and other state 
pesticide education courses has been provided. 
 Strengthen links between  diagnosticians and  First Detectors. Although m any 
diagnosticians conducted First Detector training from 2003 to 2010, budget reductions 
in 2011 resulted in substantially less First Detector training. Although this mechanism 
for strengthening links between diagnosticians and First  Detectors no longer exists, 
collaborations like the Sentinel Plant Network have served to route new first detector 
trainees to the www.first
Text Len: 1864
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Although m any 
diagnosticians conducted First Detector training from 2003 to 2010, budget reductions 
in 2011 resulted in substantially less First Detector training. Although this mechanism 
for strengthening links between diagnosticians and First  Detectors no longer exists, 
collaborations like the Sentinel Plant Network have served to route new first detector 
trainees to the www.firstdetector.org site. Some effort has been made to expand the 
TEC presenc e using social media, but it is not specific whether this benefits first 
detectors or NPDN diagnosticians. It does not replace face -to-face engagement. 
NPDN’s e-newsletter, although successful, is mainly targeted at NPDN diagnosticians. 
 Continue to partner  with other agencies, NGOs, and Extension to channel first 
detectors to resources/ allied education programs (e.g. Don’t Move Firewood, Sentinel 
Plant Network, Bugwood, etc.). 
 Appoint an education and training leader vested with the authority to participat e in 
education and training decisions at the executive level.  
 Promote the First Detector program and its resources more broadly under the banner 
of NPDN.  
 Seek to eliminate repetition in site content.  Develop a plan to maintain and/or phase 
out educationa l resources. Clarify and/or reduce other microsites and other 
maintenance-intensive social media presences that aren’t returning time investments. 
 Determine exact audience to be served by existing and future resources. The focus of 
education and training can serve NPDN network personnel and expand to encompass 
professionals and allies, but the latter ha ve many different programs already serving 

Text Len: 1663
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 microsites and other 
maintenance-intensive social media presences that aren’t returning time investments. 
 Determine exact audience to be served by existing and future resources. The focus of 
education and training can serve NPDN network personnel and expand to encompass 
professionals and allies, but the latter ha ve many different programs already serving 
them. 
18 
 
 Consider providing a moderated online technical forum for conversation and 
information sharing, using open source forum software. 
 
VI. Integration with Research 
The role of NPDN is not to conduct research.  The NPDN relies on research results and practices 
to evaluate its own responses to plant health managers. In some cases, NPDN personnel have 
been directly or indirectly involved in some research areas dealing with the appearance, diagnosis 
and management of diseases new or rare in their areas by providing methods development of 
tests created through outside research activities (one or more of the five in their jurisdiction). 
Since its inception in 2003, the NPDN has been responsible for numerous peer reviewed 
publications and since 2007 alone, 33 peer reviewed publications involving research have been 
written, averaging two to three per year (range: 1 to 5 per year) with collaborators. These findings 
and others have been communicated directly or indirectly to over 9 million people since 2007.  
 
The emphasis of NPDN is to remain a premier and diagnostic system for detection, identification 
of plant pests and pathogens and communication.  Based on its initial inception, NPDN was to be 
aligned with the veterinary counterpart NAHLN. This has been partially achieved through quality 
management training, sharing information regarding program operations practices, and use  of 
the NAHLN webportal, but additional alignment is needed.  Opportunities for
Text Len: 1868
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 detection, identification 
of plant pests and pathogens and communication.  Based on its initial inception, NPDN was to be 
aligned with the veterinary counterpart NAHLN. This has been partially achieved through quality 
management training, sharing information regarding program operations practices, and use  of 
the NAHLN webportal, but additional alignment is needed.  Opportunities for increasing capacity 
across the two fields should be created. Sharing of materials and information/ideas can open 
doors for producing other sources of income, and collaborative cross-development studies will 
strengthen the knowledge base of both networks.  Fostering communication between the 
networks remains a challenge for multiple reasons.  There are some cross - kingdom pathogens 
of plants that cause devastating diseases for animals. For example, the bacterium Rathayibacter 
toxicus, a select agent, causes Rathayibacter poisoning of animals. Its first appearance in the U.S. 
may be observed by the occurrence of dead ungulates, especially cattle. The source of 
consumption may not be readily apparent without consultation with NPDN personnel. Therefore, 
some means of secure communication should be discussed with the administrators of NIFA and 
NAHLN, so that at least the record of desired interaction is clear.  An added box of interactio n 
ideally should be on the flow charts sent to USDA.  The introduction of R. toxicus was the source 
of an ICLN exercise in 2012. One outcome from the exercise was recognition that lab capacity 
was increased through joint effort s between the NPDN and the NAHLN. Other sapronoses 
examples include Claviceps purpurea (ergotism) and Aspergillus species, and there is increasing 
evidence that plant pathogens play a role in reducing the effectiveness of human
Text Len: 1810
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
N exercise in 2012. One outcome from the exercise was recognition that lab capacity 
was increased through joint effort s between the NPDN and the NAHLN. Other sapronoses 
examples include Claviceps purpurea (ergotism) and Aspergillus species, and there is increasing 
evidence that plant pathogens play a role in reducing the effectiveness of human health and 
increase the effec tiveness of sapronoses (Emerging Infectious Diseases, volume 9, number 3 —
March 2003, letter: Emerging Human Infectious Diseases: Anthroponoses, Zoonoses, and 
Sapronoses).   
19 
 
Recommendations 
 a. Action items 
 NPDN diagnosticians should help test new APHIS regulatory diagnostic test methods 
and protocols for robustness and reproducibility before they become implemented 
into programs.  
 NPDN diagnosticians should work collaboratively with CPHST and/or state regulators 
to develop or update n ew regulatory diagnostic methods  that enable their lab to 
adjust to new technology trends or create a better fit for their specific lab scope while 
maintaining the APHIS mission.  
 NPDN should provide assistance and resources for industry, especially beta t esting 
prior to commercial product release. 
 NPDN should review plant diagnostic test needs that occur throughout the Network 
for opportunities on developing standardized and high throughput testing protocols 
with appropriate validation and assessments of key test performance measurements. 
NDPN can research information from NAHLN, the industry, and other diagnostic test 
arenas on how to accomplish this objective and then apply these concepts to current 
plant pathological knowledge.  
 
b. Specific recommendations: 

Text Len: 1684
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 opportunities on developing standardized and high throughput testing protocols 
with appropriate validation and assessments of key test performance measurements. 
NDPN can research information from NAHLN, the industry, and other diagnostic test 
arenas on how to accomplish this objective and then apply these concepts to current 
plant pathological knowledge.  
 
b. Specific recommendations: 
 Develop an effective linkage with NAHLN for communication and cooperation, 
including consideration of a joint exercise involving animals and plants  that is 
complementary to the ICLN. 
 Develop a plan with USDA for the collection, maintenance and dissem ination of 
reference strains, including obligate parasites. Develop a mechanism for the 
production and validation of standardized reference materials from these strains for 
network distribution. Because this is critical for verification purposes, the plan should 
include comparative studies and tracing of both spread and eradication of organisms, 
and include how strains are identified, maintained, and quality controlled . Language 
can be drawn from the International Organization of Standards documents ISO 17043 
and ISO Guide 34 to help ensure common quality assurance practices are used.  
Diagnostic test developers, including industry, need representative strains of 
pathogens/ pests for evaluating countermeasures.   However, industry will often 
maintain proprieta ry materials.  Opportunities must be sought out to encourage 
sharing of proprietary materials to increase the Network’s state of readiness for an 
emergency based on the NPDN’s identified threats to their stakeholders.   
 Evaluate the need for surveillance an d methodology applicable to aquatic economic 
and invasive plants. These are likely to become of greater economic impact in the 
future with water composition changes, higher water levels and decreased soil 
availability due to erosion, quality deterioration and human population
Text Len: 1979
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
emergency based on the NPDN’s identified threats to their stakeholders.   
 Evaluate the need for surveillance an d methodology applicable to aquatic economic 
and invasive plants. These are likely to become of greater economic impact in the 
future with water composition changes, higher water levels and decreased soil 
availability due to erosion, quality deterioration and human population expansion.   
Resources for some required elements of the evaluation may be available through the 
inclusion of experts from other fields responsible for similar evaluations such as the 
EPA, USDA-FS, and US Fish and Wildlife Services.  
  
20 
 
 c. Future issues: 
 Consider interactions with engineering , other diagnostic test arenas, or industry for 
evaluating new methods of ‘surveillance’. For example, the use of unmanned aerial 
vehicles with telescopic capability for disease and pest introduction  and spread, 
especially in the enlarged farm acreages and difficult wild terrains in an era of climate 
challenges makes early detection potentially easier, faster and of greater economic 
importance. 
 Further advances in research and materials development requires adequate funding. 
The review committee endorses rebuilding of the financial base for the NPDN, which 
has helped minimize or even essentially eliminate some plant disease invasions and 
their deleterious effects.  Although support for agriculture in so me states is 
reasonable, there are states that should be expected to provide adequate support 
without federal assistance.  Competitive funds may also play a role in advancing the 
science and dissemination of information of plant disease threats.  
 
Text Len: 1680
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National Plant Diagnostic Network: 2016 Review 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the Review Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
May 2016 
 
 
1 
 
2016 NPDN Review Committee 
 
 
Rick Bennett (Chair) 
Associate Dean for Research 
University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, KY  
 
Casey Sclar 
Executive Director 
American Public Gardens Association 
Kennett Square, PA 
Charla Hollingsworth 
Associate Director 
APHIS-Plant Protection and Quarantine 
Center for Plant Health, Science and Technology 
Raleigh, NC 
 
Robin Shepard 
Executive Director 
NC Association of Extension Directors 
Madison, WI 
 
Doug Luster 
Research Plant Physiologist 
Foreign Disease-Weed Science Research Unit 
USDA-ARS 
Ft. Detrick, Frederick, MD  
 
Anne Vidaver 
Professor Emeritus 
University of Nebraska 
Lincoln, NE 
Tim Murray 
APS President Elect 
Extension Plant Pathologist 
Washington State University 
Pullman, WA 
 
 
 
 
  
2 
 
NPDN 2016 Review Executive Summary 
 
The USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) convened a Review Committee who 
met from March 8 -10, 2016 to conduct a critical review of all facets of the National Plant 
Diagnostic Network (NPDN). The committee met in conjunction with the Fourth  National NPDN 
meeting in Arlington, Virginia on March 8-12, 2016
Text Len: 1279
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
The USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) convened a Review Committee who 
met from March 8 -10, 2016 to conduct a critical review of all facets of the National Plant 
Diagnostic Network (NPDN). The committee met in conjunction with the Fourth  National NPDN 
meeting in Arlington, Virginia on March 8-12, 2016 coordinated by the University of Florida. The 
Review Committee was provided background materials on the mission and history of the NPDN, 
administrative structure, and accomplishments since its inception.  
 
The Review Committee, consisting of professional representatives from major stakeholders, U.S. 
government agencies, and university partners of the NPDN, developed this report after a 
thorough review of the five regional network summaries, t he NPDN committee activity 
summaries, and after  meeting in Arlington with the NPDN Executive Committee and regional 
directors.  Although much of the core of this review came from content and output from the 2016 
national meeting, the basis of this report comes from the NPDN committees that implement the 
plans of work and coordinate the activities within and across regions. Relevant recommendations 
of the 2007 review report were also considered.  
 
This report is divided into six sections following the framew ork established in 2007 , which is 
reflective of the mission, scope, and structure of the NPDN.   In each section, the summary is 
followed by a list of action items with specific recommendations for future improvement of the 
NPDN. The Review Committee did not feel it is necessary to reflect on the history and inception 
of the NPDN since this has been adequately addressed in previous documents.  Instead, the 
Review Committee focused on an analysis of the current state of the NPDN
Text Len: 1792
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 summary is 
followed by a list of action items with specific recommendations for future improvement of the 
NPDN. The Review Committee did not feel it is necessary to reflect on the history and inception 
of the NPDN since this has been adequately addressed in previous documents.  Instead, the 
Review Committee focused on an analysis of the current state of the NPDN and suggestions for 
the future, including areas for improvement.  
 
Key Findings: 
 
The NPDN and its laboratories are considered essential for minimizing destructive pathogens and 
pests of U.S. agriculture. Considering its funding challenges, especially since 2007, the NPDN has 
functioned extremely well, based on a review of its accomplishments including reports, service 
to multiple public and private entities and resulting refereed publications.  
 
Long term funding and sustainability of the NPDN remain a concern by the Review Committee.   
Although the Review Committee does not offer specific funding solutions, the report identifies 
mission areas where funds are needed to support the program and ensure its sustained success.   
 
Succession planning at levels of the executive committee, regional directors and USDA NIFA 
remains a concern. Many of the current regional directors have been with the NPDN from the 
beginning. A succession plan is essential to ensure that these mission-critical positions are a part 
of the ongoing and future operation of the NPDN. The continued stability and functioning of the 
NPDN with its partner institutions should be seamless and follow a well -developed transition 
plan.  
3 
 
 
The NPDN Advisory Council has not been effective  and should be replaced by broad -based 
focused listening groups. These focused listening groups should be composed of representatives 
from the private sector, state/count
Text Len: 1835
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 functioning of the 
NPDN with its partner institutions should be seamless and follow a well -developed transition 
plan.  
3 
 
 
The NPDN Advisory Council has not been effective  and should be replaced by broad -based 
focused listening groups. These focused listening groups should be composed of representatives 
from the private sector, state/county governments and commodity representation to ensure all 
partners and benefactors of the NPDN are represented. 
 
Rapid detection, evaluation and use of new methodology, diagnostics, and early communication 
of disease outbreaks are essential components of the NPDN and  should remain a core mission. 
Training and education of first responders should be incorpora ted into training worksho ps. 
Diagnostic resources should be prioritized among NPDN labs, state and regional labs.   
 
Effective linkages among NPDN labs should include enhanced surge capacity during disease 
outbreaks including an effective mechanism for referral and overload samples when a lab reaches 
capacity.   
 
The NPDN Executive Committee and NIFA National Program Staff should continue to manage the 
NPDN as a cooperative agreement. A competitive funding model for the NPDN and its 
regions/labs would be highly disruptive to the continuity and vitality of the program.  
 
1 
 
 
I. Governance & Funding  
The NPDN was established by the USDA, Cooperative State Research Education and Extension 
Service (USDA CSREES) from federal funds in 2002 to provide increased diagnostic capability to 
the nation’s agricultural system.  
 
The NPDN is administered by an Execu tive Committee and Operations Committee under a 
cooperative agreement with USDA NIFA , which replaced CSREES. 
Text Len: 1713
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 the USDA, Cooperative State Research Education and Extension 
Service (USDA CSREES) from federal funds in 2002 to provide increased diagnostic capability to 
the nation’s agricultural system.  
 
The NPDN is administered by an Execu tive Committee and Operations Committee under a 
cooperative agreement with USDA NIFA , which replaced CSREES.  Initially, the NPDN 
administration was divided among the five regions, each with a separate responsibility.  
Governance was assigned to the Great Plains Diagnostic Network (GPDN), the North Central Plant 
Diagnostic Network (NCPDN) provided oversight for public relations aspects, the Northeast Plant 
Diagnostic Network ( NEPDN) coordinated diagnostics, the Southern Plant Diagnostic Network 
(SPDN) managed training and education and the Western Plant Diagnostic Network ( WPDN) 
managed exercises.  Information technology and data management was led by the National 
Repository. Following the budget reductions in 2011, the Executive Committee decided to focus 
on four areas.  Each of the four areas : Diagnostics, IT Systems, STAR -D Accreditation, and 
Communication were to be a shared responsibility of the regions together.   Committees were 
established to address governance, training and education because ther e was not sufficient 
funding for focused efforts in training and educational materials. Following the enactment of the 
Budget Control Act, a new strategic direction was established to focus on detection, diagnostics 
and reporting (communication).  The strategic planning process is still ongoing.   
 
The NPDN is composed of five regional hubs  with each having unique challenges and regional 
characteristics. They are composed of institutional partners  who vary in their level of 
participation in the region and greater Network. Partners in each region value the current 

Text Len: 1851
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 diagnostics 
and reporting (communication).  The strategic planning process is still ongoing.   
 
The NPDN is composed of five regional hubs  with each having unique challenges and regional 
characteristics. They are composed of institutional partners  who vary in their level of 
participation in the region and greater Network. Partners in each region value the current 
structure and indicate they appreciate the communications, coordination of funding and 
reporting, and opportunities to network and attend  training sessions that each regional hub 
provides. The diagnosticians in each of the labs look forward to regional meetings as an 
opportunity to exchange information, learn new techniques (as some regional meetings also 
have some hands -on diagnostic activ ities) and to network.  Several regions have provided 
additional training for their partners, and the current structure allows new diagnosticians the 
ability to be mentored by established diagnosticians. Several partner labs with specific expertise 
have opened their doors to diagnosticians who seek training on a specific topic. Each partner also 
looks to their regional hub for leadership and guidance with STAR-D, and they appreciate the fact 
that the hub labs have achieved full accreditation or have been thr ough a gap audit. State 
laboratory partners in each region have become embedded within each regional structure, and 
this has led to a sense of community that strengthens the diagnostic efforts within the regions 
and serves as a point of entry into those issues and activities that involve the entire NPDN.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
The NPDN mission statement was recently revised and is currently being vetted pending 
ratification of the NPDN Governance Charter. It states: 
 
The National Plant Diagnostic Network is a premier diagnostic system with the ability to 
quick
Text Len: 1859
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 issues and activities that involve the entire NPDN.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
The NPDN mission statement was recently revised and is currently being vetted pending 
ratification of the NPDN Governance Charter. It states: 
 
The National Plant Diagnostic Network is a premier diagnostic system with the ability to 
quickly detect and accurately identify plant pests and pathogens and to communicate timely 
and accurate information. 
 
 
The mission of the NPDN is based upon national agricultural security . It is charged with rapid 
detection, diagnosis, and early communication of outbreaks of plant pathogens. The Network 
coordinates and communicates with county and state extension agents, state departments of 
agriculture and the USDA, Animal and Plant Health Inspe ction Service, Plant Protection and 
Quarantine (USDA APHIS PPQ) during outbreaks in implementing its mission. Training of first 
responders and diagnosticians is an essential component of the NPDN, ensuring that the Network 
is prepared for the scope of its mission in the event of an outbreak.  The NPDN is a critical 
component of our nation’s biosecurity infrastructure and should serve as a model for other 
nations to emulate. 
 
However, t his new mission statement does not mention training and education. This is  a 
reflection of the reduced funding over the past few years that forced the NPDN to more 
stringently prioritize its objectives. The NPDN Executive Committee is still committed to that 
program element which will be prioritized with diagnostics and communications.  
  
The vision for the NPDN should undergo a strategic planning process and clarify a new statement 
based upon current realities.  That new vision statement should reflect high expectations for 
N
Text Len: 1750
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 to more 
stringently prioritize its objectives. The NPDN Executive Committee is still committed to that 
program element which will be prioritized with diagnostics and communications.  
  
The vision for the NPDN should undergo a strategic planning process and clarify a new statement 
based upon current realities.  That new vision statement should reflect high expectations for 
NPDN, including;  
 Increased recognition for NPDN’s accomplis hments both do mestically and 
internationally 
 Greater accountability for competent and reliable diagnostics from labs with active 
quality management systems in place (STAR-D laboratory accreditation, NPPLAP 
certifications, etc.)  
 Increased global impact thr ough cooperation and outreach programs (funded 
externally). 
 
The NPDN has an Advisory Council that was active for a few years after the NPDN was established. 
They focused on strategic prioritization of efforts and resources.  Its guidance was helpful, 
however in recent years, the Advisory Council has not been effective in the original intent due to 
limitations on participation by industry and commodity stakeholders.  The Advisory Council has 
not been directly and consistently en gaged with the NPDN leadership . Funding to support 
meetings was drastically reduced resulting in few opportunities for face -to-face interactions of 
the Advisory Council . The NPDN could have benefited from input through regular conference 
calls of the Advisory Council.  
 
3 
 
Additionally, t he Advisory Council does not have all of the representation needed to provide 
broader advice to the NPDN  because of FACA restrictions , which do not allow non -federal 
representation. A possible name change and a new charge as a listening or focus group could
Text Len: 1766
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
calls of the Advisory Council.  
 
3 
 
Additionally, t he Advisory Council does not have all of the representation needed to provide 
broader advice to the NPDN  because of FACA restrictions , which do not allow non -federal 
representation. A possible name change and a new charge as a listening or focus group could 
provide the needed input to the NPDN without violating FACA compliance.  Despite initial 
attempts to more broadly engage private industry, their participation didn’t come to f ruition. 
One approach to greater stakeholder engagement with the NPDN could be regional activities 
such as summits, commodity focus groups or other open meetings. Another approach would be 
to use some survey tool to gauge the knowledge of, interest in , and utility of the NPDN to its 
diverse stakeholders and clients.     
  
Extension and Experiment Station directors at L and Grant Universities play an important role in 
funding and support of diagnostic labs and personnel at their institution.  It is appropriate to 
develop a mechanism to inform and engage Extension and Experiment Station Directors as well 
as leadership at state departments of agriculture and provide updates on the NPDN to increase 
opportunities for their direct engagement. 
 
Succession planning at NPDN remains a concern from the executive director through the regional 
hub director, and through diagnostician levels. A succession process is needed for these critical 
positions and should be part of the ongoing evolution of the NPDN. It is critical for the stability 
and continued functioning of the NPDN and its partner institutions to have a succession plan.  
Transitions should be seamless and new diagnosticians should be welcomed by the regional 
network of current experienced dia gnosticians and
Text Len: 1792
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 is needed for these critical 
positions and should be part of the ongoing evolution of the NPDN. It is critical for the stability 
and continued functioning of the NPDN and its partner institutions to have a succession plan.  
Transitions should be seamless and new diagnosticians should be welcomed by the regional 
network of current experienced dia gnosticians and be provided access to expertise and 
assistance. New Regional Directors should be embedded into a collegial and functional Executive 
Committee.   
 
Succession planning at the National Program Leader level at NIFA is also a concern. Development 
of the NPDN has greatly benefited from interaction and programmatic participation by its current 
NIFA National Program Leader (NPL). The NPDN requires administrative oversight by the granting 
agency under the guidance of a knowledgeable and engaged NPL r epresentative to ensure a 
smooth transition during leadership changes. The Review Committee strongly encourages NIFA 
to promptly designate an NPL to provide administrative oversight with upcoming  personnel 
changes on the National Program Staff. Specifically, it is recommended that an NPL be identified 
with strong program leadership, as well as technical and programmatic skills.  
 
The review committee is pleased to note that an effective governance structure has been in place 
since its inception and that the Network is still capable of identifying and responding to plant 
pathogens in th e food and agricultural production system in the face of severe reductions in 
funding. The NPDN has maintained support for diagnostic clinics/laboratories in all 50 states plus 
Puerto Rico, Guam, and American Samoa, while instituting new training and accreditation and 
certification programs for procedures and personnel . This has been partially accomplished by  
leveraging of state and federal dollars .  It is also evident that the Regional
Text Len: 1922
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

funding. The NPDN has maintained support for diagnostic clinics/laboratories in all 50 states plus 
Puerto Rico, Guam, and American Samoa, while instituting new training and accreditation and 
certification programs for procedures and personnel . This has been partially accomplished by  
leveraging of state and federal dollars .  It is also evident that the Regional Directors comprising 
the Executive Committee maintain a true spirit of teamwork  both within and across all regions 
and have established effective working relationships with member Land Grant Universities, State 
Departments of Agriculture and USDA- APHIS. 
4 
 
 
Managing and pre -planning for diagnostic sample surge capacity is still a challenge across and 
within all regions. It was noted that no consistent performance matrix has been established that 
would assist regional coordinators to benchmark respective diagnostic clinics and allow them to 
prioritize selective equipment upgrades. Limited means exist to capture and communicate NPDN   
performance in order to document effectiveness and prove its value to all commodities and 
significant stakeholders.  
 
Funds to support the NPDN are allocated from the Food and Ag Defense Initiative (FADI) through 
NIFA beginning in 2004. Funding peaked in 2010 and then began a steady decline in 2011. These 
cuts in federal funding led the Executive Committee and laboratories to redefine and narrow the 
scope and mission of the NPDN.   Despite this challenge, NPDN has been able to modify their 
approach and deliver a program that assures support for a diagnostic presence in every state , 
although further cuts could have drastic consequences to our national agricultural system.  
 
The need to increase base funding for all regions was recognized as a major ch allenge with 
decreasing federal budgets.  There is a need to insure that effic
Text Len: 1876
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 has been able to modify their 
approach and deliver a program that assures support for a diagnostic presence in every state , 
although further cuts could have drastic consequences to our national agricultural system.  
 
The need to increase base funding for all regions was recognized as a major ch allenge with 
decreasing federal budgets.  There is a need to insure that efficiencies in funding (especially 
supplemental funding) flow are operating in all regions so that individual labs are not left with 
unreimbursed diagnostic costs or funding shortfalls.  It has been suggested that not all states are 
treated equitably relative to funding perhaps as a result of the number of states in a given region 
or differences in operations between “hub” institutions.  
 
It was recognized that there are significant opportunities to expand linkages with state 
departments of agriculture, state agriculture and environmental regulatory officials, co unty 
extension educators/agents and certified crop and nursery consultants.  Efficient leveraging of 
resources with appropriate state agencies, non-government organizations ( NGOs) and 
national/state commodity organizations should continue to be a high prio rity for all regional 
networks. The regional IPM Centers should become a formal part of the communication linkage 
and also search for leveraging grants and special pathogen appropriations.  Laboratories should 
seek applicable certifications and accreditatio ns as a means to document and improve staff 
capabilities, promote efficient utilization of equipment and facilities, and prove they continue to 
meet producer and customer needs.  
 
Recommendations 
 a. Action Items 
 The current NPDN Advisory Council has not been effective because of FACA compliance 
requirements, which prevents non -federal representation on advisory boards . The 
Review Team strongly recommends the establishment of a broad -based N
Text Len: 1934
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 facilities, and prove they continue to 
meet producer and customer needs.  
 
Recommendations 
 a. Action Items 
 The current NPDN Advisory Council has not been effective because of FACA compliance 
requirements, which prevents non -federal representation on advisory boards . The 
Review Team strongly recommends the establishment of a broad -based NPDN focus or 
listening group at both the national and regional lev el, to include representatives from 
the private sector, state/county extension, experiment station/research faculty, CCAs, 
state/federal regulatory agencies and National Plant Board (NPB) affiliates. It is especially 
important to include " industry" and NAH LN representation on the Advisory Board for 
5 
 
exchange of ideas on business practices and governance strategies.  A possible name 
change and new charge to a non -advisory role as a listening group or focus group could 
provide the needed input to the NPDN without violating FACA compliance.    
 The NPDN Executive Committee should complete development of a Strategic Plan for the 
next five years of the NPDN which establishes and identifies milestones for all aspects of 
the Network currently covered by NPDN subcommit tees and prioritize them contingent 
on funding.  
 As part of the strategic plan, a framework and process for annual self -evaluation should 
be developed that will help focus efforts on strengthening and measuring key activities. 
It should i nclude common reporting topics and formats  across all regions , and develop 
metrics for recording and reporting performance. 
 Improve identification and c oordination for recognizing labs with surge capacity in 
identification and sample processing of specific pathogens.  
 Build a succession plan to efficiently
Text Len: 1774
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 focus efforts on strengthening and measuring key activities. 
It should i nclude common reporting topics and formats  across all regions , and develop 
metrics for recording and reporting performance. 
 Improve identification and c oordination for recognizing labs with surge capacity in 
identification and sample processing of specific pathogens.  
 Build a succession plan to efficiently transfer leadership responsibilities at the regional 
and national level.  
 Develop a new vision statement that reflects the high expectations for NPDN’s continued 
success. 
 
 b. Specific Recommendations 
 Evaluate the basi s for formula  funding and practice transparency in annual funding 
allocations from national to regional to State Labs/ Clinics. Improve accounting and 
timeliness in annual funding flow and reporting to/from each of these units as well.  
 The current NPDN Advisory Council should be broadened by a newly formed focus group 
or interest group that complies with FACA requirements . This new body should be 
focused on strategic prioritization of efforts and resources. To ensure broader views and 
representation, the network directors should encourage this group to engage industry 
leaders and stakeholders in regional activities such as summits or other open meetings 
for face-to-face interactions and regular conference calls.  
 The network directors should develop a mechanism to inform and engage Extension and 
Experiment Station Directors as well as state departments of agriculture to provide 
updates on the Network and to provide an opportunity to discuss the NPDN.  
 The review committee recommends that a succession pl an be developed for the 
Executive Director, Regional Directors and the NIFA NPL responsible for the NPDN.  
University extension and research administrators could play an important role in short 
Text Len: 1859
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 state departments of agriculture to provide 
updates on the Network and to provide an opportunity to discuss the NPDN.  
 The review committee recommends that a succession pl an be developed for the 
Executive Director, Regional Directors and the NIFA NPL responsible for the NPDN.  
University extension and research administrators could play an important role in short 
term funding and support of labs at their institution if greater awareness of the scope and 
needs of NPDN labs was brought to their attention. 
 NPDN Executive Committee and NIFA National Program Staff should continue to manage 
the NPDN as a n ongoing cooperative agreement. A competitive funding model for the 
NPDN and its regions/labs would be highly disruptive to the continuity and vitality of the 
program.  
 Regarding surge capacity, the review committee encourages NPDN diagnosticians to 
receive training offered by APHIS PPQ on high consequence pathogens and p ests so that 
representative labs are prepared to assist during outbreaks of known agents.  Since 
6 
 
potential pests may be undefined and broad ranging, complicating issues should be 
addressed beforehand such as maintaining sample integrity and chain of custody  for 
shipping large numbers of samples long distances.  
 Develop a survey tool to gauge the interest of diverse stakeholders and to determine long 
and short-term plans for labs and personnel at each diagnostic lab institution.  
 New vision and mission statements should be more visible on the NPDN website.  
 Consider adding a new committee to address “Surveillance” issues, including interaction 
of NPDN labs in partnerships with IPM -PIPE components and with USDA APHIS CAPS 
programs. 

Text Len: 1714
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 lab institution.  
 New vision and mission statements should be more visible on the NPDN website.  
 Consider adding a new committee to address “Surveillance” issues, including interaction 
of NPDN labs in partnerships with IPM -PIPE components and with USDA APHIS CAPS 
programs. 
 Complete a five -year strategi c plan focused on core components such as marketing, 
incorporating recommendations from the Public Relations and Outreach Review (below) 
and also focus on documenting and measuring effectiveness, prioritizing resources, and 
building the governance and internal communication infrastructure needed to support 
diagnostics and ensure the NPDN’s continued success.  
 
II. Diagnostics  
Since its inception in 2003, the Diagnostics Committee has focused on communications among 
diagnosticians, acquisition of USDA permits, creating standard operating procedures for 
diagnosis of regulated pathogens, coordinating select agent workshops and laboratory surge 
capacity, developing a workshop on basic techniques for diagnosticians, and establishi ng and 
implementing the STAR-D lab accreditation program. The Diagnostics Committee has initiated a 
conversation with the NPDN Database Committee to address concerns expressed at the 2015 
Diagnosticians/IT meeting on the use of diagnostic confidence levels, which resulted in formation 
of an ad hoc sub-committee that was charged with surveying members on the use of diagnostic 
confidence levels. Results of that survey were presented at the 2016 NPDN national meeting.  
The Diagnostics Committee also collected data on surge capacity from every state to identify the 
resources available to handle a surge in sample volume that might occur in the event a select 
agent was found. The committee plans to update this survey, although it’s not stated
Text Len: 1819
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 diagnostic 
confidence levels. Results of that survey were presented at the 2016 NPDN national meeting.  
The Diagnostics Committee also collected data on surge capacity from every state to identify the 
resources available to handle a surge in sample volume that might occur in the event a select 
agent was found. The committee plans to update this survey, although it’s not stated when that 
will occur. 
 
The National Plant Protection Laboratory Accreditation Program (NPPLAP) accredits laboratories 
across the U.S. with the goal of increasing national diagnostic capacity and ensuring lab capability 
in delivering accurate diagnostic determinations for USDA regulatory purposes.  Several NPDN 
labs have achieved and are successfully maintaining NPPLAP accreditations. Likewise, STAR -D, a 
quality management system developed by NPDN is being practiced in an increasing number of 
NPDN labs. Scientists selected from N PDN labs are trained in audit procedures for STAR -D. This 
group continues to grow, ensuring the ability to support lab audits across the network. This effort, 
much like NPPLAP accreditation, is gaining traction with NPDN labs as more diagnosticians 
understand the value of not only accreditation, but the benefits of using a quality management 
system. There is value added to the STAR -D implementation through increased collaboration 
among Network labs, recognized standardization amongst peers, and strengthened  quality 
assurance and control of network collected data. The International Organization of Standards 
7 
 
(ISO) 13484 is expected to be approved in the future and will offer an intermediary quality 
standard for NPDN labs that have an interest in achieving ISO or STAR-D accreditation. The ISO 
13484 standard is the first standard put forward through ISO that specifically addresses plant 
pathogen testing using molecular
Text Len: 1875
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. The International Organization of Standards 
7 
 
(ISO) 13484 is expected to be approved in the future and will offer an intermediary quality 
standard for NPDN labs that have an interest in achieving ISO or STAR-D accreditation. The ISO 
13484 standard is the first standard put forward through ISO that specifically addresses plant 
pathogen testing using molecular biomarkers, and the process as initiated by the NPPLAP opens 
the door for the NPDN to additiona lly use the ISO process as a means for introducing technical 
protocols to be shared at an international level. 
 
The APHIS National Identification Services (NIS) and NPDN labs have worked to preserve sensitive 
information and to communicate needed informati on regarding samples in a timely manner. 
When suspect positive samples are confirmed by the CPHST-Beltsville Lab, state government and 
local PPQ have teamed together with the support of NPDN to delimit the pathogen and rapidly 
respond to pathogen/disease establishment. Surge capacity has increased for regulatory samples 
with additional NPDN labs becoming NPPLAP accredited. Surge control efforts for non-regulatory 
samples are unknown, although in principle, high-throughput platforms in several NPDN labs will 
support processing of greater numbers of processed samples. Establishing and organizing surge 
potential in advance of an emergency is extremely beneficial and should be pursued.  
 
Recommendations  
a. Action items 
 Develop a comprehensive accreditation and certification process for NPDN that 
identifies minimum standards for accreditation. The quality management system 
should meet NPPLAP accreditation criteria. It may be necessary to identify specific 
levels of accreditation in a quality assurance/quality management system. It is also 

Text Len: 1796
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Recommendations  
a. Action items 
 Develop a comprehensive accreditation and certification process for NPDN that 
identifies minimum standards for accreditation. The quality management system 
should meet NPPLAP accreditation criteria. It may be necessary to identify specific 
levels of accreditation in a quality assurance/quality management system. It is also 
necessary to clarify  how to obtain and distribute the resources needed to attain and 
retain the levels of quality assurance required for accreditation.  
 Establish data and practices for monitoring of laboratory workload against lab capacity 
and develop a referral process for samples to effectively utilize the capacity of the 
Network in the event of a surge.  
 Work with APHIS to establish a policy of rapid relay of confirmatory data and address 
issues of confidentiality of those data.  The review committee recognizes that sample 
status is released by the CPHST-Beltsville Lab to NIS which then passes the information 
to the affected State Plant Regulatory Official (SPRO) and State Plant Health Director 
(SPHD) and others.  As for the SOP itself, it covers everything from the first discovery 
of a pathogen or pest, to the time the final report is relayed to the SPHD and SPRO of 
the state involved, and everything in between. This includes the referral process for 
samples, alterations of protocol for surges, and rapid relay of confirmatory data, all 
done in a way to preserve confidentiality.   The current revision of the SOP is a 
continuation of close coordination between NIS and NPDN. 
 
b. Specific Recommendations 
 Plan effective linkages among the NPDN labs for enhanced surge capacity in a large 
disease outbreak or bioterror event.
Text Len: 1736
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 all 
done in a way to preserve confidentiality.   The current revision of the SOP is a 
continuation of close coordination between NIS and NPDN. 
 
b. Specific Recommendations 
 Plan effective linkages among the NPDN labs for enhanced surge capacity in a large 
disease outbreak or bioterror event. This must include an effective mechanism for 
referral of overload samples when a lab reaches capacity.  NIFA and APHIS PPQ are 
8 
 
involved in the Integrated Consortium of Laboratory Networks (ICLN), a federal effort 
charged to create a cohesive system of labs capable of integrated and coordinated 
responses to support major incidents requiring lab support.  However, since 2007, 
biosecurity has been de-emphasized, limiting the efforts of this recommendation. 
 Continue the close coordination with APHIS PPQ identification services to refine 
Standard Operating Procedures and to improve Quality Assurance Systems.  NPPLAP 
has supported, and benefits from the implementation of STAR -D by NPDN.  A more 
formal agreement between NPDN and PPQ regarding the Planned Deviation system 
would benefit all. 
 Increase coordination with laboratories run by state departments of agriculture. This 
is vitally important to a well-functioning national system of plant diagnostic labs. 
 Better integrate the work of entomologists and weed biologists into  the NPDN 
operation. 
 Implement strategies for every laboratory to meet a high standard of chain-of-custody 
for samples and data, sufficient to support APHIS, state departments of agriculture, 
DHS, and law  enforcement agencies for forensic investigations of  intentional plant 
pest or pathogen introductions
Text Len: 1673
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 weed biologists into  the NPDN 
operation. 
 Implement strategies for every laboratory to meet a high standard of chain-of-custody 
for samples and data, sufficient to support APHIS, state departments of agriculture, 
DHS, and law  enforcement agencies for forensic investigations of  intentional plant 
pest or pathogen introductions.  The STAR-D standard is based on the international 
standard ISO/IEC 17025:2005. This standard provides guidelines for maintaining 
chain-of-custody, document and record traceability, and requirements for 
confidentiality. The accredited lab is audited by thi rd party peers, and uses systems 
expressed by the standard that have been adapted and foster continual improvement 
through customer interaction and periodic self -assessments. As more NPDN labs 
become STAR-D accredited, this recommendation should be addressed more widely. 
 Develop plans to work effectively among NPDN labs and with regional and state 
laboratories to prioritize diagnostic resources and specific disease assays. This should 
include state and APHIS CAPS surveys, as well as other monitoring and enf orcement 
activities. Communication with PPQ and CAP programs is not clear. Each state 
however, is made aware of PPQ’s priority pest list each year and could be doing 
something at the state level that PPQ is not aware. S&T has been working to offer 
specific disease assays to the NPDN and State laboratories. The CPHST Beltsville lab 
has been working collaboratively to identify CAPS pathogen priorities for molecular 
validation. Several of these are in progress but a few have been rolled out to state and 
NPDN l abs. There are currently eight phy
Text Len: 1674
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
T has been working to offer 
specific disease assays to the NPDN and State laboratories. The CPHST Beltsville lab 
has been working collaboratively to identify CAPS pathogen priorities for molecular 
validation. Several of these are in progress but a few have been rolled out to state and 
NPDN l abs. There are currently eight phytoplasmas on the CAPS priority pest lists. 
Phytoplasma screening by qPCR assays have been developed by CPHST Beltsville and 
are offered to NPDN and state diagnostic laboratories. A training session was held at 
CPHST Beltsville in March 2015 in which many NPDN labs participated. 
 Develop better communication and cooperation with NAHLN and with FERN via ICLN 
and e stablish a committee to identify and prioritize diagnostic assays suitable for 
inclusion in the ICLN surge reagents program, and communicate surge capacity and 
deficiencies to the I CLN. I dentify sampling and sample handling issues for  
consideration by the ICLN Working Group on environmental sampling and sampling 
method validation. The committee could also work in parallel to the ICLN efforts with 
reagent suppliers on methods, efficacy and supply availability in surge events. 
9 
 
 Since STAR-D is operational and gaining momentum, it needs to expand its base to 
achieve sustainability. Targeted organizations could include, but are not limited to, 
the National Plant Board, National Clean Plant Network, as well as international 
groups.  
 NPDN will benefit a great deal to have more NPDN labs that are STAR-D accredited. 
 NPDN should consider a National Quality Manager position to further support STAR -
D
Text Len: 1630
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 organizations could include, but are not limited to, 
the National Plant Board, National Clean Plant Network, as well as international 
groups.  
 NPDN will benefit a great deal to have more NPDN labs that are STAR-D accredited. 
 NPDN should consider a National Quality Manager position to further support STAR -
D and support QM efforts across the system.  
 Labs could expand their quality management activitie s to include direct comparisons 
of test results, standardization of instruments and platforms, ring tests, and 
development of non-regulatory proficiency tests. 
 NPDN leaders and members should be more proactive when advocating for federal 
Farm Bill funds. Organization representation from stakeholders in Washington DC will 
raise awareness and support of the need for this lab system and its mission to protect 
American agriculture from losses resulting from pests and disease. 
 Next generation sequencing is being  used domestically and internationally to screen 
for pathogens. This is an important tool that has promise for NPDN labs. The review 
committee supports acquiring appropriate equipment and data sharing across labs. 
 Planned Deviations are used by NPPLAP accredited labs when they have platforms or 
methods that are not described in established, validated Work Instructions. As more 
NPDN labs look to replace their Cepheid thermocyclers, labs need to engage NPPLAP 
for guidance when considering new platforms. Not all real-time PCR instruments are 
created equal, and the timing involved in the shift between platforms is important. It 
is likely that a Planned Deviation will be needed before the equipment can be used for 
regulatory samples. However, the deviation can satisfy all future use by different labs 
for the specific equipment studied. 
  
c
Text Len: 1802
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 new platforms. Not all real-time PCR instruments are 
created equal, and the timing involved in the shift between platforms is important. It 
is likely that a Planned Deviation will be needed before the equipment can be used for 
regulatory samples. However, the deviation can satisfy all future use by different labs 
for the specific equipment studied. 
  
c. Future Issues for Consideration 
 In conjunction with APHIS, determine the feasibility of cooperating with the border 
countries of  Canada and Mexico on methodology and data sharing of pests and  
pathogens of mutual concern. The committee recognizes that information sharing 
could have unintended trade impacts regarding pests and diseases of regulatory 
concern. The NPDN should work closely with PPQ prior to engaging in bi- or tri-lateral 
discussions. 
 
III. Partnerships 
The NPDN has been a model for effective partnerships among local, state and federal agencies 
and organizations. The NPDN’s record of accomplishment in response to the enormous economic 
threats posed by exotic plant pathogens and pests is remarkable due largely to effective 
partnerships with Land Grant University diagnostic laboratories and USDA APHIS expert 
laboratories. These partnerships have resulted in many publications in refereed journals and in 
the validation of newly developed diagnostic protocols.  The NPDN labs have also reinvigorated 
state plant diagnostic labs with improved infrastructure.   
10 
 
 
One example of an effective partnership that had been successful early during the establishment 
of the NPDN bu t has since been less active is the NPDN ’s Exercise Program it conducted with 
USDA APHIS and the National Plant Board (NPB).  Under this program , the NPDN conducted 71 
exercises
Text Len: 1764
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
10 
 
 
One example of an effective partnership that had been successful early during the establishment 
of the NPDN bu t has since been less active is the NPDN ’s Exercise Program it conducted with 
USDA APHIS and the National Plant Board (NPB).  Under this program , the NPDN conducted 71 
exercises prior to 2011, but only four (4) since 2011 due to budget cuts.  Following 2011,  the 
Exercise Committee was merged into a subcommittee of the Training and Education Committee 
and currently meets only intermittently. The ETKnet, developed by the University of Florida SPDN 
Hub, provided some support in 2015 for the Exercise Committee to  meet more regularly and 
assure an update of the exercise protocol, but its long term sustainability is still in doubt.  
 
Implementing the Incident Command System (ICS) structure is another state/federal partnership 
that has been achieved with the NPDN.  In conjunction with APHIS and the NPB, all NPDN labs 
have conducted full scale and functional exercises , but not all NPDN diagnosticians , State Plant 
Health Directors and State Plant Regulatory officials have exercised with the ICS structure again 
due to budget limitations.     
 
Although progress has been made in engaging state and federal regulatory agencies, much 
potential exists in forming additional productive partnerships with stakeholder groups and the 
private sector.   Several st ate and federal partners are also responsible for excluding and 
eradicating regulated plant pests and in most states significant progress has been made in 
improving the level of trust between regulatory agencies and extension and diagnostic personnel. 
However, a greater level of ongoing engagement and communication with commodity groups is 
also necessary to tighten the safeguarding safety net and assure
Text Len: 1813
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 sector.   Several st ate and federal partners are also responsible for excluding and 
eradicating regulated plant pests and in most states significant progress has been made in 
improving the level of trust between regulatory agencies and extension and diagnostic personnel. 
However, a greater level of ongoing engagement and communication with commodity groups is 
also necessary to tighten the safeguarding safety net and assure that responses are rapid and 
accurate. The diagnostic/education/regulatory partnership must recognize the  importance and 
value of business confidentiality, diagnostic challenges, and the need to minimize potential 
threats through quarantines and other restrictions. 
 
One example of a successful commodity/stakeholder partnership is the Sentinel Plant Network 
Program conducted with the American Public Gardens Association. Through it, not only have 
greater resources been obtained for both the NPDN and the Association, but also a vastly 
expanded recognition of the NPDN can be made possible by leveraging professionals at botanic 
gardens themselves, who can promote NPDN to over 100 million visitors to public gardens per 
year, in addition to serving as botanical and surveying/monitoring resources.  Greater awareness 
and use of this partnership can be made by any diagnostic lab. 
 
The NPDN has profited from a commitment to forging strong partnerships between regional and 
state diagnosticians. All five NPDN regions have made great strides in developing strong 
partnerships and providing training for Certified Crop Advisors (CCAs), Pest Control Advisors 
(PCAs), county extension staff, and other first responders. Most prominently, a solid foundation 
for operating NPDN partnerships exists with the Integrated Pest Management (IPM) Center 
Network, inwhich the NPDN has formed formal partnerships in several regions. The successes of 
the Soybean Rust
Text Len: 1907
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
rop Advisors (CCAs), Pest Control Advisors 
(PCAs), county extension staff, and other first responders. Most prominently, a solid foundation 
for operating NPDN partnerships exists with the Integrated Pest Management (IPM) Center 
Network, inwhich the NPDN has formed formal partnerships in several regions. The successes of 
the Soybean Rust Information System, developed in partnerships with the USDA agencies, state 
departments of agriculture, industry partners and the Land Grant Universities, has been 
expanded in the development of the Integrated Pest Management Pest Information Platform for 
11 
 
Extension and Education (IPM-PIPE), a sentinel system and data management decision tool that 
will serve as a model for partnership between the NPDN and most, if not all, interested feder al, 
state and private interests. 
 
Past detections of plant pathogens with regulatory significance have provided an opportunity for 
extension personnel, CCAs, state regulators  and diagnostic clinicians to exercise Incident 
Command System (ICS) structure and maneuvers. Additionally, these incidents have identified  
needed resources and prompted development of sampling and diagnostic mechanisms. The need 
to develop surge capacity has encouraged critical working relationships between scientists and  
administration with the diagnostic labs, State Plant Health Directors (SPHDs), State Plant  
Regulatory Officials (SPROs), APHIS-PPQ Center for Plant Health Science and Technology (CPHST), 
and APHIS -PPQ Plant Pest Diagnostics Service units. These are initial steps toward  a fully  
integrated plant security system that point to the potential partnerships and their ability to 
harness the necessary capacity and imagination to safeguard U.S. agriculture. New potential and 
expected threats or any unexpected organisms may further  challenge existing communication 

Text Len: 1876
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
), 
and APHIS -PPQ Plant Pest Diagnostics Service units. These are initial steps toward  a fully  
integrated plant security system that point to the potential partnerships and their ability to 
harness the necessary capacity and imagination to safeguard U.S. agriculture. New potential and 
expected threats or any unexpected organisms may further  challenge existing communication 
and diagnostic systems.  
 
Partnerships could be more effective by including an industry component. Primarily due to 
concerns about confidentiality or lack of communication, these partnerships have not been 
extensively pursued and developed.  Although resources directed for outreach may be viewed as 
limiting, this does not realize the potential rate of return from awareness.  The CCAs, PCAs, 
representatives of seed, fertilizer, and pesticide manufacturers, scouts/field repres entatives for 
commodity groups and processors and professionals engaged within the horticulture industry all 
work together, giving them unique environmental and pest pressure information. These 
partnerships will not only ultimately lead to earlier detectio n of pests, but allow unique 
communication and response opportunities based on existing levels of trust. 
 
The NPDN’s unique function and focus on plants necessitates different approaches than those of 
the National Animal Health Laboratory Network (NAHLN).  The broad number of potential 
pathogen and pest threats, as well as numerous ports of entry, necessitates more diverse 
approaches and greater field resources for the diagnostic labs of the NPDN.    As a result, the 
NPDN and the NAHLN are structured differen tly and their appro ach to biosecurity are 
contrasting. The NAHLN is very focused on detection and diagnosis of a limited number of high 
consequence threat agents
Text Len: 1816
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
approaches and greater field resources for the diagnostic labs of the NPDN.    As a result, the 
NPDN and the NAHLN are structured differen tly and their appro ach to biosecurity are 
contrasting. The NAHLN is very focused on detection and diagnosis of a limited number of high 
consequence threat agents, while the NPDN’s scope is to protect all plant systems from any 
threat. NAHLN labs are certif ied and NAHLN diagnosticians are proficiency tested to execute 
approved protocols for a limited number of pathogens/threat agents , analogous to the NPDN 
STAR-D and APHIS/PPQ NPPLAP programs.   The NAHLN is operational in select labs in several 
states, while NPDN is operati onal in every U.S. state and it s territories.  The NAHLN is guided 
primarily by APHIS Veterinary Services while the NPDN is funded by agreements with USDA-NIFA 
with APHIS Farm Bill grants supplementing the USDA -NIFA agreements. Even considering these 
structural dissimilarities, there should be opportunities to interact and communicate with the 
NAHLN in laboratory accreditation, proficiency testing, and technology strategies.   More on this 
relationship will be discussed in later sections.      
 
12 
 
Recommendations 
a. Action Items 
 The review committee recommends that NPDN leadership and individual diagnostic 
laboratories seek partnerships with national and state NGOs such as the Farm Bureau, 
commodity groups and  processors, CCAs and  agricultural product producers and  
suppliers that allow for greater stakeholder engagement. The Sentinel Plant Network 
Program partnership is a
Text Len: 1586
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. Action Items 
 The review committee recommends that NPDN leadership and individual diagnostic 
laboratories seek partnerships with national and state NGOs such as the Farm Bureau, 
commodity groups and  processors, CCAs and  agricultural product producers and  
suppliers that allow for greater stakeholder engagement. The Sentinel Plant Network 
Program partnership is a good beginning, but only by holding focus groups and directly 
seeking out the needs of these interest groups will greater resources and recognition 
be obtained. 
 The review committee recommends that the NPDN directors develop a strategy to 
inform and engage Land Grant Extension and Experiment Station Directors as well as 
state departments of agriculture to gain support of network host institutions.   
 Individual NPDN  laboratories should establish and/or strengthen the partnerships 
with SPROs, SPHDs and natural resource agencies. 
 The NPDN Exercise Program and the Incident Command System should be 
reinvigorated to facilitate the establishment and maintenance of relationships among 
NPDN, state and federal staff involved in plant health emergencies.  USDA-NIFA should 
consider this a high priority for increased supplemental funding. 
 
 b. Specific Recommendations 
 NPDN leadership should seek partnerships with  those federal agencies who se 
missions involve land or resource management or plant pest regulations. 
 NPDN leadership should establish a communication link with the NAHLN and consider 
opportunities to communicate and exchange information with the NAHLN in 
laboratory accreditation, proficiency testing, and technology strategies. One option is 
to have an  NAHLN representative seat on the Advisory Board (or its replacement 
entity) for NPDN and vice versa for exchange of ideas or business practices. 
�
Text Len: 1824
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HLN and consider 
opportunities to communicate and exchange information with the NAHLN in 
laboratory accreditation, proficiency testing, and technology strategies. One option is 
to have an  NAHLN representative seat on the Advisory Board (or its replacement 
entity) for NPDN and vice versa for exchange of ideas or business practices. 
 As available,  individual state diagnostic laboratories should establish partnerships 
with non- traditional cooperators such as Historically Black Colleges and Universities, 
Tribal Nations, and private land managers. 
 NPDN laboratories should identify roles, responsibilities, and measures of success 
with partners and establish mechanisms to share data, as well as investigational and 
analytical information. NPDN should further identify international standards which 
provide guidelines for these practices including those available by ISO, Codex, IPPC, 
AAVLD, and RPPOs. This can be  facilitated by developing and implementing MOUs 
with key partners. 
 NPDN laboratories should develop and implement additional ICS preparedness 
scenarios in coope ration with key partners to  improve communication, enhance 
readiness and engage mutually available diagnostics. Varying the size of scenarios in 
regional, state, and  local locations and  cropping systems will  challenge different 
resources and personnel. 
 NPDN should strengthen partnerships with  industry and professional associations 
such as the American Phytopathological Society (APS), the American Public Gardens 
Association, AmericanHort, the  California Association of Pest Control Advisors, the 
13 
 
American Farm Bureau and others to increase recognition and awareness of its crucial 
work.  Consideration should be given to enhance the Sentinel Plant Network Program.  
�
Text Len: 1794
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 as the American Phytopathological Society (APS), the American Public Gardens 
Association, AmericanHort, the  California Association of Pest Control Advisors, the 
13 
 
American Farm Bureau and others to increase recognition and awareness of its crucial 
work.  Consideration should be given to enhance the Sentinel Plant Network Program.  
 NPDN should plan engagement activities with stakeholders such as focus groups, 
periodic summits, or other open meetings to gain and exchange information.  
 Representatives of stakeholder  organizations should be considered for membership 
on the NPDN Advisory Board (or its replacement entity).  
 The NPDN should consider strengthening communications with the National Seed 
Health System to increase the Network’s role in seed-related issues. 
 
IV. Public Relations and Outreach 
The NPDN has engaged in structured public relations efforts since its inception and has 
established a Public Relations Committee, which has been less active in recent years due to 
budget constraints. Efforts have included the development of a variety of promotional print and 
electronic materials, highlighting national and regional activities, laboratory capacity and disease-
specific information. National and regional newsletters, brochures, and websites have been 
effectively deployed to distribute information. In a notable example of outreach activities, NPDN 
partnered very effectively with several commodity groups, and USDA agencies to develop 
effective materials on field crop pathogen identification and management as well as ornamental 
plant pathogens and diseases. The NPDN websites provide qualit y information on new disease 
issues and outbreaks in a user-friendly interface (http://www.NPDN.org, (http://www.NPDN.org; 
https://firstdetector.org/; http://www.protect
Text Len: 1822
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 crop pathogen identification and management as well as ornamental 
plant pathogens and diseases. The NPDN websites provide qualit y information on new disease 
issues and outbreaks in a user-friendly interface (http://www.NPDN.org, (http://www.NPDN.org; 
https://firstdetector.org/; http://www.protectingusnow.org/, sentinel plant network 
(www.sentinelplantnetwork.org), www.npdn-spn.org).  
 
Despite years of continuous effort, some potential partners and stakeholders are still not 
knowledgeable about the NPDN mission and activities. Additionally, as previously stated, a top 
priority must be to further educate commodity groups, private industry and other plant industry 
stakeholders on the mission, scope and activities of the NPDN, and engage them as partners. 
There is a lack of brand awareness, both of the NPDN itself, and of its products. Although there 
is a brand logo and identity, it must be focused into a plan with communication goals. The NPDN 
should develop a formal public relations strategy, with strategic goals at the national, regional 
and state levels.   It is imperative that state, regional and national NPDN members identify and 
engage new audiences, while sustaining the interest of existing partners and stakeholders. For 
example, not all University administrators currently view the NPDN as an entity that is 
contributing to their current strategic goals.  
 
The NPDN has had a complicated relationship with state departments of agriculture (SDA).  
Extension and regulatory missions are not always the same and Extension needs for diagnostic 
methods and specificity of identification are often different.  Some diagnosticians and 
administrators in SDAs perceive N
Text Len: 1709
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 is 
contributing to their current strategic goals.  
 
The NPDN has had a complicated relationship with state departments of agriculture (SDA).  
Extension and regulatory missions are not always the same and Extension needs for diagnostic 
methods and specificity of identification are often different.  Some diagnosticians and 
administrators in SDAs perceive NPDN labs as a parallel effort, and some state diagnosticians do 
not grasp how they could interact with their NPDN cohorts.   
14 
 
Recommendations 
 a. Action Items 
 Develop a formal public relations strategic plan with goals at the national, regional and 
state levels. Consider public relations more broadly in websites, newsletters, and 
interactions with groups.  Identify target audiences for the strategy and for 
distribution, and prioritize audiences such as Land Grant University administrators, 
and State Plant Health Directors. This plan should contain measurable elements that 
define what successful execution looks like, as well as a programmatic brand review 
that identifies strong as well as repetitive brands that exist within NPDN.  
 Diagnosticians in each laboratory should engage in regional meetings,  focus groups, 
open houses and visits by stakeholders to diagnostic clinics on a rotating basis. These 
visits should be tracked by NPDN as evidence that outreach is taking place at an 
increased rate.  
 Improve access, search capability and content on the website(s), especially publicly 
accessible in formation and training materials for stakeholders (including but not 
limited to producers, c rop advisors, first detectors, and green industry/commodity 
professionals. Websites may need to be consolidated, re-organized, or co-branded to 
ensure that NPDN is best identified as
Text Len: 1778
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and content on the website(s), especially publicly 
accessible in formation and training materials for stakeholders (including but not 
limited to producers, c rop advisors, first detectors, and green industry/commodity 
professionals. Websites may need to be consolidated, re-organized, or co-branded to 
ensure that NPDN is best identified as the source of these valuable programs.  
 The NPDN leadership and Public Relations Committee should develop a framework 
and process for annual self-evaluation that will help to focus strengthening activities, 
including reporting topics and formats, and metrics for recordi ng and reporting 
performance. 
 NPDN laboratories in states where there is no Land Grant University, should 
strengthen partnerships with SDAs as partner labs and interact with the SDAs in 
regional meetings and trainings.    
 
 b. Specific Recommendations 
 Expand professional outreach by organizing annual town hall meetings and providing 
booths, di splays, and information at venues such as at annual  meetings of the 
American Phytopathological Society, the American Public Gardens Association, 
AmericanHort, t he National Plant Board, National Association of state Departments 
of Ag riculture, Partners in Community Forestry, and  the North American Plant 
Protection Organization. 
 Identify key agricultural legislators in each state and develop plans to educate them 
via the NPDN partners in that state on local, regional and national accomplishments 
and needs. Consider inviting State legislative and Congressional staff to diagnostic 
labs or meeting them at disease impact sites for awareness building. 
 Develop and disseminate communications toolkits that diagnosticians can use to 
introduce/promote the NPDN in their outreach efforts
Text Len: 1782
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
via the NPDN partners in that state on local, regional and national accomplishments 
and needs. Consider inviting State legislative and Congressional staff to diagnostic 
labs or meeting them at disease impact sites for awareness building. 
 Develop and disseminate communications toolkits that diagnosticians can use to 
introduce/promote the NPDN in their outreach efforts. 
 Consolidate website presence and make tools available to constituents in an 
organized and brand-identifiable fashion based on results of PR strategic plan 
 Adopt a formal, structured annual reporting system for NPDN labs at the local/state 
and national levels. Ideally, it could include short statements of accomplishment that 
can be di sseminated to various audience s. Develop “Points of  Progress” for 
15 
 
communication at the state and regional levels for Experiment Station Directors, 
SPROs, and USDA agencies. 
 Publish more of the diagnostic laboratories output in scientific journals. Consider 
publishing pathogen diagnostic standard operating procedures and ring-test results in 
easily accessible journals such as those in the Plant Health Management Network. 
 
V. Training & Education  
The mission of the NPDN Training & Education Committee (TEC) is to provide general leadership, 
guidelines and direction for the national First Detector training program. This mission is 
accomplished by developing materials in several formats to facilitate the work of First Detectors 
and First Detector educators. All NPDN materials are available online at www.firstdetector.org. 
The 2007 review indicates that from its or igins, education and training w ere stated goals of the 
NPDN and an important infrastructure was built: “A vast network of first responders has been 
developed
Text Len: 1777
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 facilitate the work of First Detectors 
and First Detector educators. All NPDN materials are available online at www.firstdetector.org. 
The 2007 review indicates that from its or igins, education and training w ere stated goals of the 
NPDN and an important infrastructure was built: “A vast network of first responders has been 
developed and is rapidly expanding down to the local level, fulfilling one of the primary visions 
of the network.” Training is a primary focus of the Network and is accomplished at the national, 
regional and state level with effectiveness, applying a “train -the-trainer” philosophy. Online 
scenario-based training has been implemented with online access, and Standard Operating 
Procedures are in place on the internet for open access. 
 
Overall, the TEC has been very successful in addressing its core mission of training “First 
Detectors.” Since its inception in 2003, an estimated 16,000+ participants have received face-to-
face training across a broad variety of commodities, and this likely under -represents the total 
number of participants since many sessions were not recorded in the database. An e -learning 
module program was implemented in 2009 and nearly 5,000 participants have viewed over 
23,000 trai ning modules including those registering through other partner sites including the 
NPDN training gateway, Protect US  (a partnership with the Regional IPM Centers) , and the 
Sentinel Plant Network (a partnership with the American Public Gardens Association). In addition, 
training has occurred in 22 countries worldwide.    
 
The mission of the TEC is defined in the context of serving First Detectors and First Detector 
educators only, and does not explicitly address the needs of diagnosticians themselves. However, 
Text Len: 1780
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and the 
Sentinel Plant Network (a partnership with the American Public Gardens Association). In addition, 
training has occurred in 22 countries worldwide.    
 
The mission of the TEC is defined in the context of serving First Detectors and First Detector 
educators only, and does not explicitly address the needs of diagnosticians themselves. However, 
diagnosticians and other professionals involved with the NPDN do receive training in places such 
as at specialized workshops offered annually by USDA -PPQ CPHST-Beltsville on specific topics 
related to diagnosis and identification of plant pathogens  of regulatory significance as well as 
other key topics.  These are valuable training sessions outside the scope of that offered for First 
Detectors and not limited to compliance trainings such as that for STAR-D, but not mentioned in 
the TEC report specifically. 
 
Extensive budget reductions occurred in 2010, and for the education focus to continue, 
extramural funding was obtained. Collaborations with Protect US and the Sentinel Plant Network 
provided additional funding through the Farm Bill (10201) and resulted in a suite of tools (e.g. e-
learning modules, interpretation, and scouting guides, etc.) for identification of high 
16 
 
consequence pests and pathogens housed at www.firstdetector.org, and advanced taxonomic 
training videos, which are housed on the YouTube site, www.youtube.con/user/npdnchannel. 
Current partners listed on the www.firstdetector.org site include USDA -APHIS, Regional IPM 
Centers, the CAPS program, the National Plant Board and the State Departments of Agriculture, 
EDEN, the Center for Ecosystem Species and Health (Bugwood), the Community Invasive Species 
Network (Protect US), and the
Text Len: 1748
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
pdnchannel. 
Current partners listed on the www.firstdetector.org site include USDA -APHIS, Regional IPM 
Centers, the CAPS program, the National Plant Board and the State Departments of Agriculture, 
EDEN, the Center for Ecosystem Species and Health (Bugwood), the Community Invasive Species 
Network (Protect US), and the Sentinel Plant Network. 
 
The training and education programs of the TEC were very successful in raising the initial visibility 
and awareness of the NPDN and the importance of plant biosecurity to the general public from 
2003 until the 2010 budget reduction. Nearly 5,000 First Detectors have been trained since 2009 
when the e-learning platform was implemented and although it has been successful, it is not a 
replacement for face -to-face training. Given new funds, First Detector training should be 
reemphasized by both face-to-face and electronic means. Branded training materials should also 
be updated as needed. Although efforts were made to raise the visibility of the First Detector 
network and NPDN on social media, the impact of this effort is unclear. 
 
The learning gateway established at www.firstdetector.org serves to direct users to its many 
different resources. However, because it has lacked one consistent programmatic source of 
dedicated funding, decisions on the look and interactivity of the we bsite will need attention. 
Many collaborators have been involved, and the First Detector program seems to be split 
between gaining resources by collaboration, and retaining its own brand presence. 
 
The use of “First Detector” is a strong brand positioning statement for NPDN, and it should be 
retained, although having this wrapped in a strong communications / public relations plan would 
eluc
Text Len: 1752
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 have been involved, and the First Detector program seems to be split 
between gaining resources by collaboration, and retaining its own brand presence. 
 
The use of “First Detector” is a strong brand positioning statement for NPDN, and it should be 
retained, although having this wrapped in a strong communications / public relations plan would 
elucidate which social media streams (if any) should be retained. A communication specialist 
should be retained to make recommendations for improving TEC activities. 
 
Recommendations  
a. Action Items  
 First detector training should be incorporated into Certified Crop Adviser training 
workshops with CCA continuing education credits being approved for the NPDN core 
e-learning modules. In 2009, NPDN created and launched e -learning modules which 
provided an opportunity for asynchronous learning. 
 Establish new and continue to sustain partnerships that support and leverage NPDN 
and First Detector materials. 
 Invest in a central information sharing hub and house regional and central training 
resources in one location under an NPDN or First Detector Umbrella. Unify education 
and training across all regions and platforms to better support the NPDN and the First 
Detector network. 
 Survey audience s to determine utility and potential resource overlap with other 
programs and develop new content that seeks to serve a unique audience  
17 
 
b. Specific Recommendations 
 Expand first detector training to encompass Master Gardeners, CCAs, crop 
consultants, and other agribusiness professionals. Substantial progress was made from 
2007-2010 in expanding First Detector training primarily with the implementation of 
e-learning modules beginning in 2009. More recently, the NPDN YouTube channel
Text Len: 1770
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

b. Specific Recommendations 
 Expand first detector training to encompass Master Gardeners, CCAs, crop 
consultants, and other agribusiness professionals. Substantial progress was made from 
2007-2010 in expanding First Detector training primarily with the implementation of 
e-learning modules beginning in 2009. More recently, the NPDN YouTube channel was 
expanded and it hosts First Detector training materials  and advanced taxonomic 
resources mostly used for internal NPDN training purposes. TEC activities expanded 
their presence in social media including Facebook and Twitter, and First Detector 
training and resources were promoted through the Sentinel Plant Network  and First 
Detector newsletter. Some of these activities were curtailed in 2010 following a 
substantial budget reduction. 
 Expand the current initiative on Incident Command System training to all regions. 
 Continue to develop, expand and refine online traini ng tools and update and expand 
the e-learning system through expanded collaborations.  
 Establish Training and Education Committees in all regions. 
 Develop and provide certifications and  certification programs for various types of  
training. The committee recognizes that a certification for completing First Detector 
training has been developed and a receipt of credit in CCA -approved and other state 
pesticide education courses has been provided. 
 Strengthen links between  diagnosticians and  First Detectors. Although m any 
diagnosticians conducted First Detector training from 2003 to 2010, budget reductions 
in 2011 resulted in substantially less First Detector training. Although this mechanism 
for strengthening links between diagnosticians and First  Detectors no longer exists, 
collaborations like the Sentinel Plant Network have served to route new first detector 
trainees to the www.first
Text Len: 1864
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Although m any 
diagnosticians conducted First Detector training from 2003 to 2010, budget reductions 
in 2011 resulted in substantially less First Detector training. Although this mechanism 
for strengthening links between diagnosticians and First  Detectors no longer exists, 
collaborations like the Sentinel Plant Network have served to route new first detector 
trainees to the www.firstdetector.org site. Some effort has been made to expand the 
TEC presenc e using social media, but it is not specific whether this benefits first 
detectors or NPDN diagnosticians. It does not replace face -to-face engagement. 
NPDN’s e-newsletter, although successful, is mainly targeted at NPDN diagnosticians. 
 Continue to partner  with other agencies, NGOs, and Extension to channel first 
detectors to resources/ allied education programs (e.g. Don’t Move Firewood, Sentinel 
Plant Network, Bugwood, etc.). 
 Appoint an education and training leader vested with the authority to participat e in 
education and training decisions at the executive level.  
 Promote the First Detector program and its resources more broadly under the banner 
of NPDN.  
 Seek to eliminate repetition in site content.  Develop a plan to maintain and/or phase 
out educationa l resources. Clarify and/or reduce other microsites and other 
maintenance-intensive social media presences that aren’t returning time investments. 
 Determine exact audience to be served by existing and future resources. The focus of 
education and training can serve NPDN network personnel and expand to encompass 
professionals and allies, but the latter ha ve many different programs already serving 

Text Len: 1663
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 microsites and other 
maintenance-intensive social media presences that aren’t returning time investments. 
 Determine exact audience to be served by existing and future resources. The focus of 
education and training can serve NPDN network personnel and expand to encompass 
professionals and allies, but the latter ha ve many different programs already serving 
them. 
18 
 
 Consider providing a moderated online technical forum for conversation and 
information sharing, using open source forum software. 
 
VI. Integration with Research 
The role of NPDN is not to conduct research.  The NPDN relies on research results and practices 
to evaluate its own responses to plant health managers. In some cases, NPDN personnel have 
been directly or indirectly involved in some research areas dealing with the appearance, diagnosis 
and management of diseases new or rare in their areas by providing methods development of 
tests created through outside research activities (one or more of the five in their jurisdiction). 
Since its inception in 2003, the NPDN has been responsible for numerous peer reviewed 
publications and since 2007 alone, 33 peer reviewed publications involving research have been 
written, averaging two to three per year (range: 1 to 5 per year) with collaborators. These findings 
and others have been communicated directly or indirectly to over 9 million people since 2007.  
 
The emphasis of NPDN is to remain a premier and diagnostic system for detection, identification 
of plant pests and pathogens and communication.  Based on its initial inception, NPDN was to be 
aligned with the veterinary counterpart NAHLN. This has been partially achieved through quality 
management training, sharing information regarding program operations practices, and use  of 
the NAHLN webportal, but additional alignment is needed.  Opportunities for
Text Len: 1868
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 detection, identification 
of plant pests and pathogens and communication.  Based on its initial inception, NPDN was to be 
aligned with the veterinary counterpart NAHLN. This has been partially achieved through quality 
management training, sharing information regarding program operations practices, and use  of 
the NAHLN webportal, but additional alignment is needed.  Opportunities for increasing capacity 
across the two fields should be created. Sharing of materials and information/ideas can open 
doors for producing other sources of income, and collaborative cross-development studies will 
strengthen the knowledge base of both networks.  Fostering communication between the 
networks remains a challenge for multiple reasons.  There are some cross - kingdom pathogens 
of plants that cause devastating diseases for animals. For example, the bacterium Rathayibacter 
toxicus, a select agent, causes Rathayibacter poisoning of animals. Its first appearance in the U.S. 
may be observed by the occurrence of dead ungulates, especially cattle. The source of 
consumption may not be readily apparent without consultation with NPDN personnel. Therefore, 
some means of secure communication should be discussed with the administrators of NIFA and 
NAHLN, so that at least the record of desired interaction is clear.  An added box of interactio n 
ideally should be on the flow charts sent to USDA.  The introduction of R. toxicus was the source 
of an ICLN exercise in 2012. One outcome from the exercise was recognition that lab capacity 
was increased through joint effort s between the NPDN and the NAHLN. Other sapronoses 
examples include Claviceps purpurea (ergotism) and Aspergillus species, and there is increasing 
evidence that plant pathogens play a role in reducing the effectiveness of human
Text Len: 1810
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
N exercise in 2012. One outcome from the exercise was recognition that lab capacity 
was increased through joint effort s between the NPDN and the NAHLN. Other sapronoses 
examples include Claviceps purpurea (ergotism) and Aspergillus species, and there is increasing 
evidence that plant pathogens play a role in reducing the effectiveness of human health and 
increase the effec tiveness of sapronoses (Emerging Infectious Diseases, volume 9, number 3 —
March 2003, letter: Emerging Human Infectious Diseases: Anthroponoses, Zoonoses, and 
Sapronoses).   
19 
 
Recommendations 
 a. Action items 
 NPDN diagnosticians should help test new APHIS regulatory diagnostic test methods 
and protocols for robustness and reproducibility before they become implemented 
into programs.  
 NPDN diagnosticians should work collaboratively with CPHST and/or state regulators 
to develop or update n ew regulatory diagnostic methods  that enable their lab to 
adjust to new technology trends or create a better fit for their specific lab scope while 
maintaining the APHIS mission.  
 NPDN should provide assistance and resources for industry, especially beta t esting 
prior to commercial product release. 
 NPDN should review plant diagnostic test needs that occur throughout the Network 
for opportunities on developing standardized and high throughput testing protocols 
with appropriate validation and assessments of key test performance measurements. 
NDPN can research information from NAHLN, the industry, and other diagnostic test 
arenas on how to accomplish this objective and then apply these concepts to current 
plant pathological knowledge.  
 
b. Specific recommendations: 

Text Len: 1684
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 opportunities on developing standardized and high throughput testing protocols 
with appropriate validation and assessments of key test performance measurements. 
NDPN can research information from NAHLN, the industry, and other diagnostic test 
arenas on how to accomplish this objective and then apply these concepts to current 
plant pathological knowledge.  
 
b. Specific recommendations: 
 Develop an effective linkage with NAHLN for communication and cooperation, 
including consideration of a joint exercise involving animals and plants  that is 
complementary to the ICLN. 
 Develop a plan with USDA for the collection, maintenance and dissem ination of 
reference strains, including obligate parasites. Develop a mechanism for the 
production and validation of standardized reference materials from these strains for 
network distribution. Because this is critical for verification purposes, the plan should 
include comparative studies and tracing of both spread and eradication of organisms, 
and include how strains are identified, maintained, and quality controlled . Language 
can be drawn from the International Organization of Standards documents ISO 17043 
and ISO Guide 34 to help ensure common quality assurance practices are used.  
Diagnostic test developers, including industry, need representative strains of 
pathogens/ pests for evaluating countermeasures.   However, industry will often 
maintain proprieta ry materials.  Opportunities must be sought out to encourage 
sharing of proprietary materials to increase the Network’s state of readiness for an 
emergency based on the NPDN’s identified threats to their stakeholders.   
 Evaluate the need for surveillance an d methodology applicable to aquatic economic 
and invasive plants. These are likely to become of greater economic impact in the 
future with water composition changes, higher water levels and decreased soil 
availability due to erosion, quality deterioration and human population
Text Len: 1979
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
emergency based on the NPDN’s identified threats to their stakeholders.   
 Evaluate the need for surveillance an d methodology applicable to aquatic economic 
and invasive plants. These are likely to become of greater economic impact in the 
future with water composition changes, higher water levels and decreased soil 
availability due to erosion, quality deterioration and human population expansion.   
Resources for some required elements of the evaluation may be available through the 
inclusion of experts from other fields responsible for similar evaluations such as the 
EPA, USDA-FS, and US Fish and Wildlife Services.  
  
20 
 
 c. Future issues: 
 Consider interactions with engineering , other diagnostic test arenas, or industry for 
evaluating new methods of ‘surveillance’. For example, the use of unmanned aerial 
vehicles with telescopic capability for disease and pest introduction  and spread, 
especially in the enlarged farm acreages and difficult wild terrains in an era of climate 
challenges makes early detection potentially easier, faster and of greater economic 
importance. 
 Further advances in research and materials development requires adequate funding. 
The review committee endorses rebuilding of the financial base for the NPDN, which 
has helped minimize or even essentially eliminate some plant disease invasions and 
their deleterious effects.  Although support for agriculture in so me states is 
reasonable, there are states that should be expected to provide adequate support 
without federal assistance.  Competitive funds may also play a role in advancing the 
science and dissemination of information of plant disease threats.  
 
Text Len: 1680
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
