 
 
Bovine Tuberculosis 
Eradication 
 
Uniform Methods and Rules, 
Effective January 1, 2005 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
United States 
Department of 
Agriculture 
 
Animal and  
Plant Health 
Inspection 
Service 
 
APHIS 91-45-011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs 
and activities on the basis of race, color national origin, gender, religion, age, disability, 
political beliefs, sexual orientation, or marital or family status.  (Not all prohibited bases 
apply to all programs.)  Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for 
communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should 
contact USDA’ s TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
 
To files a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 
Room 326 W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 
20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice and TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
 
 
Issued December 2004 
 
                    
Text Len: 1139
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 
20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice and TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
 
 
Issued December 2004 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     i
Contents 
 
 
                                                                                                                       Page  
Introduction                                            
Text Len: 548
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                Page  
Introduction                                                                                                                1 
 
Part I–Definitions    2 
 Accredited herd 2 
 Accredited Veterinarian 2 
 Affected herd 2 
 Anniversary date    2 
 Approved feedlot/approved pens    2 
 Approved laboratory    3 
 Approved livestock facility    3 
 Approved slaughtering establishment    3 
 Area Veterinarian in Charge (AVIC)    3 
 Auction    3 
 Bison    3 
 Bovine interferon gamma assay    3 
 Bovine tuberculosis    3 
 Cattle    3 
 Caudal fold tuberculin (CFT) test    3 
 Certificate    3 
 Cervical tuberculin (CT) test    4 
 Commission firm    4 
 Commission sales    4 
 Commuter herd    4 
 Comparative cervical tuberculin (CCT) test    4 
 Dealer    4 
 Designated Accredited Veterinarian    4 

Text Len: 845
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 Cervical tuberculin (CT) test    4 
 Commission firm    4 
 Commission sales    4 
 Commuter herd    4 
 Comparative cervical tuberculin (CCT) test    4 
 Dealer    4 
 Designated Accredited Veterinarian    4 
 Designated Tuberculosis Epidemiologist (DTE)    4 
 Direct shipment to slaughter    5 
            Epidemiology                                                                                                      5 
 Eradication    5 
 Exotic hoofstock    5 
 Exposed animals    5 
 Feedlot    5 
 Geographic separation    5 
 Herd    5 
 Herd depopulation    6 
 Herd of origin    6 
 Herd test    6 
 Individual herd plan    6 
 Listed establishment    6 
 Livestock    6 
            Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)    6 
 Natural additions    6 
 Negative animals    6 
 No gross lesion (NGL)    7 
 Official eartag    7 
 Official
Text Len: 851
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   6 
 Livestock    6 
            Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)    6 
 Natural additions    6 
 Negative animals    6 
 No gross lesion (NGL)    7 
 Official eartag    7 
 Official identification/officially identified    7 
 Official tuberculosis test    7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     ii
 Parallel testing    7 
 Permit    7 
 Premises identification number    7 
 Program herd    7 
 Reactor    7 
 Responder    7 
 Routine testing    8 
 Split status State    8 
 State or zone status    8 
 Suspect    8 
 Test eligible cattle or bison (Herd Accreditation/Reaccreditation Test)    8 
 Test eligible cattle or bison (for movement)    8 
 Test eligible cattle or bison (
Text Len: 816
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 testing    8 
 Split status State    8 
 State or zone status    8 
 Suspect    8 
 Test eligible cattle or bison (Herd Accreditation/Reaccreditation Test)    8 
 Test eligible cattle or bison (for movement)    8 
 Test eligible cattle or bison (Program Herds)    8 
 Tuberculin    9 
 Zone    9 
 
Part II – General Procedures (Minimum Requirements)                                         10 
A. Authority to implement and administer tuberculosis program control and  10 
      eradication measures 
B.   Personnel authorized to apply official tuberculosis tests  10 
C.  Approved laboratories  10 
D. Presumptive diagnostic test  10 
E.   Supplemental diagnostic tests and procedures  10 
F. Primary diagnostic test  10 
G. Tuberculin test interpretation  11 
H. Cleaning and disinfection of premises, conveyances, and materials  11 
I.    Determination of the State-of-origin of infected animals  11 
J.   Identification  11 
K.   Dealer Registration and Recordkeeping  11 
 
Part III–Standard Procedures (Minimum Requirements)  13 
A.   Classification of cattle and bison tested  13 
B.   Reporting of tests  13 
C.  Disposition of tuberculin-responding cattle and bison  14 
D.   Interstate or interzone movement requirements for tuberculosis (cattle or  14 
 b
Text Len: 1268
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part III–Standard Procedures (Minimum Requirements)  13 
A.   Classification of cattle and bison tested  13 
B.   Reporting of tests  13 
C.  Disposition of tuberculin-responding cattle and bison  14 
D.   Interstate or interzone movement requirements for tuberculosis (cattle or  14 
 bison not known to be affected with or exposed to tuberculosis)    
E.   Procedures in tuberculosis-affected herds  16 
F.   Procedures in tuberculosis-affected feedlots   16 
G.   International movement requirements for tuberculosis (cattle or bison not  16 
      known to be affected with or exposed to tuberculosis)    
H.   Identification of reactor cattle and bison  16 
I.    Identification of exposed cattle, bison, and other livestock  17 
J.   Quarantine procedures  17 
K.   Retest schedules for high-risk herds  18 
L.   Surveillance around an M. bovis affected herd where wildlife are known to  19 
      be affected 
 
Part IV–Accredited Herd Plan for Cattle or Bison   20 
A.   Animals to be tested   20 
B.   Accreditation and reaccreditation   20 
C.  Additions   21 
D.  Artificial insemination   22 
 
                                                                 
Text Len: 1172
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

D.  Artificial insemination   22 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     iii
Part V–State or Zone Status   23 
A.   General provisions   23 
B.   Surveillance   24 
C.   Annual and/or semiannual reporting   25 
D.   Specific State or zone status plans   25 
 
Appendix A   27 
Tuberculosis Test Requirements for Various Classes of Cattle and Bison Not    
Known to be Affected with or Exposed to Tuberculosis and from Non-Accredited  
Herds, Other than Commuter Herds, Being Moved Interstate or Interzone for  
Breeding or Feeding Purposes 
 
Appendix B   28 
Tuberculosis Test Requirements for Various Classes of Cattle and Bison from    
Accredited Herds Being Moved Interstate or Interzone for Breeding or Feeding  
Purposes 
 
Appendix C   29 
Performance Standards for Caudal Fold Tu
Text Len: 917
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
eding or Feeding Purposes 
 
Appendix B   28 
Tuberculosis Test Requirements for Various Classes of Cattle and Bison from    
Accredited Herds Being Moved Interstate or Interzone for Breeding or Feeding  
Purposes 
 
Appendix C   29 
Performance Standards for Caudal Fold Tuberculin Testing    
 
  iv 
Summary of Changes 
 
July 20, 2005 
Page 28, Appendix C: Corrected explanatory notes below table.   
 
January 10, 2006 
Page 24, Part V, D, 1, c:  Amended requirements for downgrading from Accredited-free to Modified Accredited 
Advanced. 
 
March 14, 2006 
Page 5, Definitions: Revised definition of “herd” 
 
Page 6, Definitions: Revised definition of “herd test” 
 
Page 16, Part III, F: Amended instructions for handling tuberculosis-affected feedlots 
 
Page 25, Part V, B, 2, d: Added requirement for completing investigations of slaughter cases within 90 days. 
 
                                                                                                                                         
Text Len: 1013
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                            1
Introduction 
 
 
 These Uniform Methods and Rules (UM&R) are the minimum standards 
adopted and approved by the Deputy Administrator, Veterinary Services (VS), 
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), on January 20, 2005.  
They were established for the maintenance of tuberculosis-free accredited 
herds of cattle and bison and the maintenance of State or zone status in the 
U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) tuberculosis eradication program. 
 
 These minimum standards do not preclude the adoption of more stringent 
standards by any State or zone.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                
Text Len: 838
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                     2 
                              Part I – Definitions 
 
 
 
Accredited herd A herd that has passed at least two consec utive official tuberculosis tests of all 
eligible animals conducted at 9-15 month intervals, has no evidence of, or 
exposure potential to, bovine tuberculosis and meets the standards of these 
Uniform Methods and Rules (UM&R).  Accredited herd status is maintained 
through annual herd testing in Accreditation Preparatory and Modified Accredited 
States or zones, and through biennial herd testing in Modified Accredited 
Advanced and Accredited-free States or zones during a period of 3 months prior to 
the anniversary date to 3 months following the anniversary date.  However, if the 
reaccreditation test is conducted following the anniversary date, the Accredited 
status of the herd will be suspended until the reaccreditation test is completed.  
The testing interval for maintaining Accredited herd status in States having more 
than one status [split status zone(s)] shall be the same for the whole State and 
shall be that of the lowest status of any zone within the State.  The Designated 
Tuberculosis Epidemiologist (DTE) and Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist must 
certify in
Text Len: 1316
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
The testing interval for maintaining Accredited herd status in States having more 
than one status [split status zone(s)] shall be the same for the whole State and 
shall be that of the lowest status of any zone within the State.  The Designated 
Tuberculosis Epidemiologist (DTE) and Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist must 
certify in writing to the Accredited status of herds in States or zones with wildlife 
reservoirs of tuberculosis and in States or zones with lower than Modified 
Accredited Advanced status. 
 
Accredited A veterinarian approved by the Administrator of APHIS, to perform functions 
Veterinarian required by cooperative State-Federal animal disease control and eradication                           
programs. 
 
Affected herd A herd of livestock in which there is  strong and substantial evidence that 
Mycobacterium bovis exists.  This evidence should include, but is not limited to, 
any of the following:  histopathology, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay, 
bacterial isolation or detection, testing data, or epidemiologic evidence such as 
contact with known sources of infection. 
 
Anniversary date The test observation  date (month/day) of the second consecutive test in cattle 
and/or bison with no evidence of tuberculosis disclosed (that is, the test on which 
the herd was recognized as accredited, or the accrediting test).  Following the 
initial accreditation of a herd, the herd must be tested annually if located in an 
Accreditation Preparatory or Modified Accredited State or zone, or biennially if 
located in a Modified Accredited Advanced or Accredited-free State or
Text Len: 1621
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 is, the test on which 
the herd was recognized as accredited, or the accrediting test).  Following the 
initial accreditation of a herd, the herd must be tested annually if located in an 
Accreditation Preparatory or Modified Accredited State or zone, or biennially if 
located in a Modified Accredited Advanced or Accredited-free State or zone to 
maintain Accredited status.  The testing interval for reaccrediting herds in States 
having more than one status [split status zone(s)] will be the same for the whole 
State and will be that of the lowest status of any zone within the State.  
Reaccreditation tests must be conducted between 9 and 15 months from the 
anniversary date (month/day) established on the accrediting test in herds located in 
Accreditation Preparatory or Modified Accredited States or zones.  Reaccreditation 
tests must be conducted between 21 and 27 months from the anniversary date 
(month/day) established on the accrediting test in herds located in Modified 
Accredited Advanced or Accredited Free States or zones.  
 
Approved feedlot/ A confined area, either the entire feedlot or designated pens within the feedlot, 
approved pens approved jointly by the Chief State Animal Health Official and the APHIS 
Administrator for feeding restricted cattle or bison.  Any provisions for grazing or 
pasturing restricted cattle or bison entering an approved feedlot/approved pens 
must be formalized in a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) by the Chief State 
Animal Health Official and the Administrator.  The MOU must include adequate 
isolation and fencing requirements as recommended by the DTE and the Regional 
Tuberculosis Epidemiologist.  An animal leaving the confined area must be 
destined to either
Text Len: 1736
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 feedlot/approved pens 
must be formalized in a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) by the Chief State 
Animal Health Official and the Administrator.  The MOU must include adequate 
isolation and fencing requirements as recommended by the DTE and the Regional 
Tuberculosis Epidemiologist.  An animal leaving the confined area must be 
destined to either another approved feedlot or approved pen, or to an approved 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     3
slaughtering establishment.  The operator of the feedlot must follow approved 
procedures to account for animals entering or leaving the confined area.  The Chief 
State Animal Health Official and the Area Veterinarian in Charge (AVIC) of each 
State must provide the Veterinary Services (VS) National Center for Animal Health 
Programs a list of approved feedlots and/or approved pens within his/her State.  
The VS staff must be notified of any additions to the list or any deletions from the 
list. 
   
Approved laboratory A State, Federal , or National Animal Health Laboratory Network
Text Len: 1173
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 provide the Veterinary Services (VS) National Center for Animal Health 
Programs a list of approved feedlots and/or approved pens within his/her State.  
The VS staff must be notified of any additions to the list or any deletions from the 
list. 
   
Approved laboratory A State, Federal , or National Animal Health Laboratory Network (NAHLN) 
veterinary laboratory specifically recognized by APHIS to conduct official 
tuberculosis program diagnostic testing.  The primary laboratory for tuberculosis 
histopathological examination and bacteriological culture shall be the National 
Veterinary Services Laboratories (NVSL), Ames, Iowa.  Food Safety and 
Inspection Service (FSIS) field service laboratories may be utilized for 
histopathology. 
 
Approved livestock A stockyard, livestock market, buying station, concentration point, or any other  
facility premises under State or Federal veterinary supervision where livestock are 
assembled and that has been approved under Title 9, Code of Federal Regulations 
(9 CFR), Section 71.20. 
 
Approved slaughtering A slaughtering establishment operating under the provisions of the Federal 
establishment Meat Inspection Act (21 U.S.C. 601 et seq.), or a State-inspected slaughtering 
establishment that has inspection by a State inspector at the time of slaughter. 
 
Area Veterinarian in The veterinary official of APHIS, VS who is assigned by the VS Deputy 
Charge (AVIC) Administrator to supervise and perform the official animal health activities of APHIS 
in the State concerned. 
 
Auction A public sale of livestock to the highest bidder. 
 
Bison Bovids (genus Bison) commonly referred to as American buffalo or buffalo. 
 
Bovine interfer
Text Len: 1699
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 VS Deputy 
Charge (AVIC) Administrator to supervise and perform the official animal health activities of APHIS 
in the State concerned. 
 
Auction A public sale of livestock to the highest bidder. 
 
Bison Bovids (genus Bison) commonly referred to as American buffalo or buffalo. 
 
Bovine interferon An official supplemental diagnostic test that, if approved by the Chief State Animal  
gamma assay                   Health Official and the AVIC  within the State, may be used in cattle herds under 
the direction of the DTE and with the concurrence of the Regional Tuberculosis 
Epidemiologist.  The bovine interferon gamma assay should only be conducted on 
blood samples collected between 3 and 30 days after injection of bovine tuberculin 
for the caudal fold tuberculin (CFT) test. 
 
Bovine tuberculosis A chronic, granulomatous di sease caused primarily by Mycobacterium bovis, a 
very slow growing, acid-fast, Gram-positive, rod to filamentous shaped bacteria.  
M. bovis has a very broad host range and can infect all warm-blooded vertebrates, 
including humans. 
 
Cattle All domestic bovine (genus Bos) animals of all ages. 
 
Caudal fold tuberculin The intradermal injection of 0.1ml of  USDA bovine purified protein derivative 
(CFT) test (PPD) tuberculin (1 mg/ml PPD) into either side of the caudal fold with reading by 
visual observation and palpation 72 hours (plus or minus 6 hours) following 
in
Text Len: 1417
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Caudal fold tuberculin The intradermal injection of 0.1ml of  USDA bovine purified protein derivative 
(CFT) test (PPD) tuberculin (1 mg/ml PPD) into either side of the caudal fold with reading by 
visual observation and palpation 72 hours (plus or minus 6 hours) following 
injection.   
 
Certificate An official document issued by an APHIS representative, a State representative, or 
an Accredited Veterinarian at the point of origin of a shipment of livestock to be 
moved interstate that includes the official identification of each animal to be moved; 
the number, breed, sex, and approximate age of the animals covered by the 
document; the purpose for which the animals are to be moved; the date and place  
 
                                                                                                                                                                     4 
 of issuance; the points of origin and destination; the consignor and the consignee; 
and which states that the animal or animals identified on the certificate meet the 
requirements for interstate movement. 
 

Text Len: 1097
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                              4 
 of issuance; the points of origin and destination; the consignor and the consignee; 
and which states that the animal or animals identified on the certificate meet the 
requirements for interstate movement. 
 
Cervical tuberculin The intradermal injection of 0.1 ml of USDA bovine cervical PPD tuberculin 
(CT) test (2 mg/ml PPD) in the cervical region with reading by visual observation and 
palpation 72 hours (plus or minus 6 hours) following injection.   
 
Commission firm A person, partnership, or corporation that buys and sells livestock as a third party 
and reports details of the transaction to the seller, the buyer, or both.  This includes 
any such person or group regardless of whether a fee is charged for the services. 
 
Commission sales Sales that are conducted by a third party who reports details of the transactions to 
the seller, the buyer, or both. 
 
Commuter herd A herd that has been recognized and a pproved to have its animals moved 
interstate or interzone, without change of ownership, during the course of normal 
production operations.  The animals must move directly from property owned, 
leased, or rented by certain individual producers or entities directly to property 
owned, leased, or rented by these same individual producers or entities.  A 
commuter herd agreement specifying testing or certifications excepted or required, 
and agreed upon by State and Federal officials and the individual or entity for each 
State affected must be in place prior to any movements and must be reviewed and 
renewed annually to remain in effect. 
 
Comparative cervical
Text Len: 1631
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 or rented by these same individual producers or entities.  A 
commuter herd agreement specifying testing or certifications excepted or required, 
and agreed upon by State and Federal officials and the individual or entity for each 
State affected must be in place prior to any movements and must be reviewed and 
renewed annually to remain in effect. 
 
Comparative cervical The intradermal injection of bi ologically balanced USDA bovine PPD 
tuberculin (CCT) test tuberculin (0.1 ml)  and avian PPD tuberculin (0.1 ml) at separate sites in the 
midcervical area to determine the probable presence of bovine tuberculosis  
 (M. bovis) by comparing the responses to the two tuberculins at 72 hours (plus or 
minus 6 hours) following injection.  The CCT injection must occur either:  (1) within 
10 days following the CFT injection or (2) more than 60 days following the CFT 
injection.  This test shall be administered only by a State or Federal veterinarian 
specifically trained in the application of the test. 
 
Dealer All persons engaged in the business of buying or selling livestock in commerce 
either on their own account or as the employees or agents of the vendor, 
purchaser, or both, or all persons engaged in the business of buying or selling 
livestock in commerce on a commission basis.  The term shall not include persons 
who: (1) buy or sell livestock as part of their own bona fide breeding, feeding, or 
dairy or beef operations; (2) are not engaged in the business of buying, selling, 
trading, or negotiating the transfer of livestock; or (3) receive livestock exclusively 
for immediate slaughter on their
Text Len: 1630
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 basis.  The term shall not include persons 
who: (1) buy or sell livestock as part of their own bona fide breeding, feeding, or 
dairy or beef operations; (2) are not engaged in the business of buying, selling, 
trading, or negotiating the transfer of livestock; or (3) receive livestock exclusively 
for immediate slaughter on their own premises.   
 
Designated Accredited An Accredited Veterinarian trained and approved to conduct specific tuberculosis 
Veterinarian                            tests such as the bovine interferon gamma assay and/or other tuberculosis 
program activities. 
 
Designated A State or Federal epidemiologist designated in each State  by APHIS to make 
Tuberculosis decisions concerning the use and interpreta tion of diagnostic tests for tuberculosis 
Epidemiologist (DTE) and to manage the tuberculosis program.  The DTE must be selected jointly by the 
cooperating Chief State Animal Health Official, the AVIC, and the Regional 
Tuberculosis Epidemiologist.  The National Center for Animal Health Programs – 
Eradication and Surveillance Team Staff of VS must concur with the appointment. 
 
 The DTE has the responsibility to determine the scope of epidemiologic 
investigations, determine the status of herds, assist in development of individual 
 
                                                                                 
Text Len: 1367
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                                                                    5
herd plans, and coordinate disease surveillance and eradication programs within 
his or her geographic area of responsibility.  The DTE has authority to make  
 independent decisions concerning the use and interpretation of diagnostic tests 
and the management of herds when those decisions are supported by sound 
disease eradication principles. 
 
Direct shipment to The shipment of livestock from a premises, under permit and without unloading, 
slaughter directly to a slaughter establishment under State or Federal inspection and without 
diversion to assembly points, such as auctions, dealers, commission firm premises, 
public stockyards, or feedlots. 
 
Epidemiology A branch of medical science that deals wi th the incidence, distribution, and control 
of disease in the animal population. 
 
Eradication The complete elimination of bovine tubercu losis from livestock in a State or zone.  
 
Exotic hoofstock Hoofed livestock  other than cattle, bison, domestic sheep and goats, horses, 
mules, donkeys and swine that are not
Text Len: 1202
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, and control 
of disease in the animal population. 
 
Eradication The complete elimination of bovine tubercu losis from livestock in a State or zone.  
 
Exotic hoofstock Hoofed livestock  other than cattle, bison, domestic sheep and goats, horses, 
mules, donkeys and swine that are not considered indigenous to a State or zone: 
(e.g. certain species of antelope such as addax, blesbok, kudu, nilgai, and oryx; 
certain species of cervids such as axis, sika, and fallow deer; certain species of 
sheep and goats such as aoudad, ibex, and markhor; and certain species of 
equine such as zebra.) 
 
Exposed animals Any livestock that have been exposed to  bovine tuberculosis by reason of 
associating with other livestock in which M. bovis has been diagnosed. 
 
Feedlot A confined drylot area for finish feeding of animals.  
 
Geographic separation A minimum of 30 feet of separation, no common or shared handling facilities or 
equipment, no common watering or feeding equipment, and no common feed 
vehicles that enter the premises of herds of different status.  Also, if herds of 
different status are fed by the same personnel, workers must wear different 
outerwear (e.g., boots and coveralls) when moving from a lower status herd to a 
higher status herd. 
  
Herd Except for livestock assembled at feedlots,  any group of livestock maintained for at 
least 4 months on common ground for any purpose, or two or more groups of 
livestock under common ownership or supervision that are geographically 
separated but that have
Text Len: 1533
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
alls) when moving from a lower status herd to a 
higher status herd. 
  
Herd Except for livestock assembled at feedlots,  any group of livestock maintained for at 
least 4 months on common ground for any purpose, or two or more groups of 
livestock under common ownership or supervision that are geographically 
separated but that have an interchange or movement of livestock without regard to 
health status, as determined by the Administrator. This definition shall include: 
 
1.   All livestock under common ownership or supervision that are grouped on one       
 or more parts of any single premises, farm, or ranch; or  
 
 2.  All livestock under common ownership or  supervision on two or more premises   
  that are geographically separated, but in which the animals have been  
  interchanged or had contact with animals  from different premises.  It will be
  assumed that contact between animals of the same species on the different
  premises has occurred unless the owne r establishes otherwise and the results
  of the epidemiologic investigation are consistent with the lack of contact
  between premises; or  
 
 3.   All livestock on common premises, such as community pastures or grazing 
association units, but owned by different persons.  Other groups of animals 
owned or co-owned by the persons involved that are located on other premises 
are considered to be part of a herd unless the epidemiologic investigation 
 
                                                                     
Text Len: 1512
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 herd unless the epidemiologic investigation 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     6 
establishes that animals from an affected herd have not had the opportunity for 
direct or indirect contact with animals from that specific premises. 
 
Herd depopulation The destruction, by slaughter or by death otherwise, of all livestock in a herd that 
have been exposed to bovine tuberculosis.  Restocking of the affected premises 
shall not begin until the depopulation and the required cleaning and disinfection 
have been completed, and the premises has been vacant of all livestock for at 
least 30 days. 
 
Herd of origin A herd of one or more sires and dams and their offspring from which animals in a 
consignment presented for interstate or international movement originate.  The 
herd of origin may be the herd of birth or the herd where the animal has resided for 
a minimum 4-month period immediately prior to movement.  If the owner/manager 
of the herd has two or more groups of animals at different locations, and there is 
movement of animals between the groups,
Text Len: 1198
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ignment presented for interstate or international movement originate.  The 
herd of origin may be the herd of birth or the herd where the animal has resided for 
a minimum 4-month period immediately prior to movement.  If the owner/manager 
of the herd has two or more groups of animals at different locations, and there is 
movement of animals between the groups, then they are all considered to be one 
herd of origin.  Additional animals can be moved into a herd of origin during or after 
the 4-month qualifying period if the animals:  (1) originate from a tuberculosis 
accredited herd, or (2) originate from a herd that was negative on an official test for 
bovine tuberculosis conducted within the last 12 months and the individual cattle or 
bison being moved into the herd of origin are negative to any additional tests for 
tuberculosis required by the APHIS Administrator. 
 
Herd test An official tuberculosis test of all test elig ible cattle or bison in a herd as well as any 
other commingled or exposed livestock which may be part of that herd, as deemed 
necessary by the Designated Tuberculosis Epidemiologist or the Regional 
Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
 
Individual herd plan A written disease management plan that is designed by the herd owner(s) and/or 
their representative(s), and a State or Federal veterinarian to eradicate 
tuberculosis from an affected herd while reducing human exposure to the disease.  
The herd plan will include appropriate herd test frequencies, tests to be employed, 
and any additional disease management or herd management practices deemed 
necessary to eradicate tuberculosis from the herd in an efficient and effective 
manner.  The plan must be approved by the Chief State Animal Health Official and 
AVIC, and have the concurrence of
Text Len: 1792
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 human exposure to the disease.  
The herd plan will include appropriate herd test frequencies, tests to be employed, 
and any additional disease management or herd management practices deemed 
necessary to eradicate tuberculosis from the herd in an efficient and effective 
manner.  The plan must be approved by the Chief State Animal Health Official and 
AVIC, and have the concurrence of the DTE or Regional Tuberculosis 
Epidemiologist. 
 
Listed establishment             An establishment, such as a slaughter plant or a rendering plant, that operates 
under the provisions of Title 9, CFR, Part 71. 
 
Livestock Cattle, bison, cervids, swine, goats, and other hoofed animals including exotic 
hoofed animals, such as antelope, raised or maintained in captivity for any 
purpose.  The domestic species llama and alpaca are also included.  (Note:  
Exclusion of any livestock being evaluated, tested, or depopulated because of 
tuberculosis on any particular premises shall only be made with the concurrence of 
the DTE and Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist.) 
 
Memorandum of  A formal agreement between two or more entities that provides for conducting        
Understanding (MOU) certain activities under specifically defined conditions. 
 
Natural additions Animals born and raised in a herd. 
 
Negative animals Any cattle or bison that show no response to an official tuberculosis  test; are 
classified negative on the bovine interferon gamma assay if conducted; or are 
classified negative for tuberculosis by a State or VS veterinarian based upon 
history, supplemental tests, examination of the carcass, and histopathological 
examination and bacteriological culture
Text Len: 1683
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 
Negative animals Any cattle or bison that show no response to an official tuberculosis  test; are 
classified negative on the bovine interferon gamma assay if conducted; or are 
classified negative for tuberculosis by a State or VS veterinarian based upon 
history, supplemental tests, examination of the carcass, and histopathological 
examination and bacteriological culture of selected tissues. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     7
 
No gross Any animal that has no visible  lesion(s) of bovine tuberculosis detected upon 
lesion (NGL) necropsy or slaughter inspection.  (An animal with a skin lesion(s) alone will be 
considered in the same category as an NGL animal.) 
 
Official eartag An eartag approved by the APHIS Administ rator as providing unique identification 
for each individual bovine or bison by conforming to the alphanumeric National 
Eartagging System. 
 
Official identification/ The identification of livestock by means of an official eartag, registration tattoo, or 
offic
Text Len: 1132
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.) 
 
Official eartag An eartag approved by the APHIS Administ rator as providing unique identification 
for each individual bovine or bison by conforming to the alphanumeric National 
Eartagging System. 
 
Official identification/ The identification of livestock by means of an official eartag, registration tattoo, or 
officially identified brand, or any  other method approved by the Administrator of APHIS, that provides 
unique identification for each animal. 
 
Official tuberculosis A test for bovine tuberculosis, appr oved by APHIS, applied and reported by 
test authorized personnel (Part II, B.) in acco rdance with this UM&R.  The official 
tuberculosis tests for cattle and bison are the: 
 
•  Caudal fold tuberculin test 
•  Comparative cervical tuberculin test 
•  Cervical tuberculin test 
•  Bovine interferon gamma assay (cattle only) 
 
Parallel testing Two or more diagnostic test procedures applied to an animal or herd 
 simultaneously.  If one or more of the test procedures is positive, the animal or 
herd cannot be classified as negative. 
 
Permit An official document issued by a VS representative, a State representative, an 
Accredited Veterinarian, or a designated Accredited Veterinarian that is required to 
accompany any reactor, suspect, or exposed livestock to slaughter.  The permit will 
list: (1) the reactor tag number or official eartag number in the case of reactor, 
suspect, or exposed livestock; (2) the owner’s name and address; (3) origin and 
destination locations; (4) number of animals covered; and
Text Len: 1549
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 any reactor, suspect, or exposed livestock to slaughter.  The permit will 
list: (1) the reactor tag number or official eartag number in the case of reactor, 
suspect, or exposed livestock; (2) the owner’s name and address; (3) origin and 
destination locations; (4) number of animals covered; and (5) the purpose of the 
movement.  If a change in destination becomes necessary, a new permit must be 
issued by authorized personnel.  No diversion from the destination on the permit is 
allowed. 
 
Premises identification An APHIS-approved method of identific ation that includes the assignment of  
number a unique number or alpha-numeric number to a premises by State or Federal 
animal health officials and with such premises number or alpha-numeric number 
being applied to the individual animal(s) residing on, or being moved from the 
premises. 
 
Program herd Any herd of livestock known or suspecte d of being affected with, or exposed to,  
 M. bovis that is being evaluated by State and/or Federal animal health officials to 
determine its disease status. 
Reactor Any bovid (genus Bos) or bison that shows a response to an official tuberculosis 
test and is classified a reactor by the testing veterinarian or DTE, or any suspect 
animal that is classified a reactor by the DTE upon slaughter inspection or 
necropsy, histopathological examination, PCR assay, and/or culture of selected 
tissues collected by the Federal or State veterinarian performing or supervising the 
slaughter inspection or necropsy. 
Responder Any livestock officially skin tested for tuberculosis that has a  visible or palpable 
response at the site of tuberculin injection
Text Len: 1662
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
TE upon slaughter inspection or 
necropsy, histopathological examination, PCR assay, and/or culture of selected 
tissues collected by the Federal or State veterinarian performing or supervising the 
slaughter inspection or necropsy. 
Responder Any livestock officially skin tested for tuberculosis that has a  visible or palpable 
response at the site of tuberculin injection. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     8 
Routine testing CFT tests conducted as part of a State or zone  eradication or surveillance program 
in which the results of all tested animals are reported to the appropriate State 
and/or Federal animal health officials. 
Split status State A State designated by APHIS and State animal health officials as having two or 
more geographic areas with different bovine tuberculosis statuses.  Such a State 
must meet annual performance measures outlined in an MOU to maintain split 
status. 
 
State or zone status One of five categories for which a State or zone may qualify based on:  (1) the 
infrastructure existing in the State or zone for conducting a bovine
Text Len: 1210
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

more geographic areas with different bovine tuberculosis statuses.  Such a State 
must meet annual performance measures outlined in an MOU to maintain split 
status. 
 
State or zone status One of five categories for which a State or zone may qualify based on:  (1) the 
infrastructure existing in the State or zone for conducting a bovine tuberculosis  
eradication program; (2) the compliance with the provisions of this UM&R; and (3) 
the prevalence of infection in the State or zone.  The five categories are:  (1) 
Accredited-free State or zone; (2) Modified Accredited Advanced State or zone; (3) 
Modified Accredited State or zone; (4) Accreditation Preparatory State or zone; and 
(5) non-accredited State or zone. 
 
The requirements and standards for attaining and maintaining each of the five 
State or zone bovine tuberculosis eradication program status levels are provided in 
Part V of this UM&R. 
Suspect Any cattle or bison that show a response to the CFT test and are not classified as 
reactor, or any cattle or bison that have been classified as suspect by CCT tests; 
the bovine interferon gamma assay; or any other official test for tuberculosis.                            
 
Test eligible cattle                 1.   In Accredited-free States or zones:  all cattle or bison 24 months of  
or bison (Herd age (as evidenced by the central incisors being fully erupted and in wear) and 
Accreditation
Text Len: 1421
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     
 
Test eligible cattle                 1.   In Accredited-free States or zones:  all cattle or bison 24 months of  
or bison (Herd age (as evidenced by the central incisors being fully erupted and in wear) and 
Accreditation/ older. 
Reaccreditation Test) 
         2.   In Modified Accredited Advanced Stat es or zones:  all cattle or bison 18 
months of age (as evidenced by the loss of the central deciduous incisors) and 
older. 
 
                                                3.   In Modified Accredited States or zones:  all cattle or bison 12 months of age 
and older. 
 
                                             4.   In Accreditation Preparatory States or zones:  all cattle or bison regardless of 
age. 
    
Test eligible cattle 1. From Accredited-free States or  zones:  no test required.   
or bison (for movement)   
 2. From Modified Accredited Advanced States or zones:  all cattle and bison 18 
months of age (as evidenced by the loss of the central incisors) and older.  
(Note:  Applicable when a test for movement is required.  See Part III
Text Len: 1072
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  no test required.   
or bison (for movement)   
 2. From Modified Accredited Advanced States or zones:  all cattle and bison 18 
months of age (as evidenced by the loss of the central incisors) and older.  
(Note:  Applicable when a test for movement is required.  See Part III, D.2.d.) 
 
 3. From Modified Accredited States or zones:  all cattle and bison to be moved 
that are 2 months of age and older.  (Note:  Applicable when a test for 
movement is required.  See Part III, D.3.b. and Part III, D.3.d.) 
 
 4. From Accreditation Preparatory States or zones:  cattle and bison of all ages.  
(Note:  Applicable when a test for movement is required.  See Part III, D.4.b 
and Part III, D.4.c.) 
 
Test eligible cattle           In accordance with the individual herd plan or applicable eradication program 
or bison (Program                standards. 
Herds) 
 
                                                                                                                   
Text Len: 984
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                                  9
Tuberculin A product approved by USDA  and produced under USDA license for injection into 
livestock for the purpose of detecting bovine tuberculosis. 
Zone A defined geographical land area identifiabl e by geological, political, manmade, or 
surveyed boundaries with mechanisms of disease spread, epidemiological 
characteristics, and the ability to control the movement of animals across the 
boundaries of the zone taken into account. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     10 
PART
Text Len: 748
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                             10 
PART II - General Procedures (Minimum Requirements) 
 
A.  Authority to implement and administer tuberculosis program control and eradication measures 
State laws and/or regulations must be in place to provide the authority to apply tuberculosis tests to any livestock, 
and to restrict the movement of any livestock, or any other animal(s), including captive wildlife suspected of being 
affected with, or exposed to M. bovis, at such times as may be deemed necessary by the cooperating State or 
Federal animal health officials.  These officials reserve the right to supervise and monitor any tuberculosis testing 
or any other official tuberculosis control and eradication activities conducted by an Accredited Veterinarian or a 
designated Accredited Veterinarian.  (Note:  Any livestock that are being considered for Johne’s disease 
vaccination must be negative to an official tuberculosis test prior to such vaccination.) 
B.  Personnel authorized to apply official tuberculosis tests 
Official tuberculosis tests shall be conducted by State or Federal animal health veterinarians by Accredited 
Veterinarians (CFT test only); or by designated Accredited Veterinarians.  Technicians employed by State or 
Federal governments and approved by such governments may conduct routine screening tuberculosis (CFT) 
tests when directly supervised by State or Federal animal health veterinarians. 
 
C.  Approved laboratories 
 
The primary laboratory for all tuberculosis diagnostic purposes shall be NVSL, Ames, Iowa.  State, Federal, or 

Text Len: 1620
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.  Technicians employed by State or 
Federal governments and approved by such governments may conduct routine screening tuberculosis (CFT) 
tests when directly supervised by State or Federal animal health veterinarians. 
 
C.  Approved laboratories 
 
The primary laboratory for all tuberculosis diagnostic purposes shall be NVSL, Ames, Iowa.  State, Federal, or 
NAHLN veterinary laboratories may also be recognized by APHIS to conduct official tuberculosis program 
diagnostic testing.  FSIS laboratory results are acceptable for tissue examination of regular kill slaughter cattle or 
bison in those cases where no submission was made to NVSL. 
 
D.  Presumptive diagnostic test 
 
The CFT test is the official test for routine use in individual cattle or bison and herds of such animals where the 
tuberculosis status of the animals is unknown.  Cattle and bison shall not be subjected to a CFT retest at an 
interval of less than 60 days. 
 
E.   Supplemental diagnostic tests and procedures 
 
 1.   The CCT test is an official  test for retesting cattle or bison tuberculin test suspects.  It shall be applied 
only by a State or Federal regulatory veterinarian specifically trained in conducting the test and shall not 
be used in known affected herds without the prior written consent of cooperating State-Federal animal 
health officials.  The CCT test shall not be used as a primary test for animals of unknown status.  
 
 2.   The bovine interferon gamma assay may be used in cattle herds only, and only  when approved by the 
Chief State Animal Health Official and AVIC as an official test for use in the State and with the 
concurrence of the DTE and the VS Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist,
Text Len: 1710
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 for animals of unknown status.  
 
 2.   The bovine interferon gamma assay may be used in cattle herds only, and only  when approved by the 
Chief State Animal Health Official and AVIC as an official test for use in the State and with the 
concurrence of the DTE and the VS Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist, as outlined in Part III, A.4. 
 
 3.   Currently, histopathology, diagnostic bacterio logy, and PCR assay of formalin-fixed tissue are all 
supplemental diagnostic procedures approved for use in the program.  These procedures should be used 
in conjunction with tuberculosis test results and necropsy or slaughter data to assign herd status. 
 
F.   Primary diagnostic test 
 
 1.   The CT test is the recommended test for use in herds affected with bovine tuberculosis and is required as 
the initial test for testing exposed cattle or bison from such herds.  The CT test shall be applied only by a 
veterinarian employed by the State or Federal government.  Results of a CT test can only be classified as 
reactor or negative. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                       
Text Len: 1182
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                              11
 2.   The CFT test is a primary diagnostic test in ca ttle or bison when used in lieu of the CT test in herds 
affected with bovine tuberculosis.  Any response shall warrant the reactor classification.  The CFT test 
may only be used as a primary diagnostic test when applied by a veterinarian employed by the State or 
Federal government and with the approval of the DTE or Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
 
G.   Tuberculin test interpretation 
 
 1.   Decisions will be based upon the professional judgm ent of the testing veterinarian in accordance with the 
policy established by the cooperating State and Federal animal health officials and the test requirements 
outlined in these UM&R under Part III, A. 
 
 2.   The injection site on each animal shall be  palpated and any responses recorded and reported. 
  Observation without palpation is not acceptable a nd shall constitute cause for removal of veterinary
  accreditation. 
 
H.  Cleaning and disinfection of premises, conveyances, and materials 
 
All premises—including all structures, ho lding facilities, feed and water troughs, conveyances, and materials— 
that are determined by the appropriate cooperating State and Federal animal health officials to constitute a health 
hazard
Text Len: 1368
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 cause for removal of veterinary
  accreditation. 
 
H.  Cleaning and disinfection of premises, conveyances, and materials 
 
All premises—including all structures, ho lding facilities, feed and water troughs, conveyances, and materials— 
that are determined by the appropriate cooperating State and Federal animal health officials to constitute a health 
hazard to humans or animals because of bovine tuberculosis shall be properly cleaned and disinfected.  This 
shall be done in accordance with procedures approved by such State and Federal animal health officials within  
15 days after the removal of tuberculosis-affected or exposed cattle and bison and other tuberculosis-affected or 
exposed livestock.  However, these officials, for reasons satisfactory to them, may extend the time limit for 
disinfection to 30 days when a request for such extension is received before the expiration date of the original  
15-day period allowed. 
 
I.  Determination of the State-of-origin of infected animals 
 
Tuberculosis found during slaughter inspection or otherwise in any livestock will be considered to have originated 
in the State where the animal was slaughtered or the disease was disclosed unless successful traceback 
procedures identify another State as the original source. 
 
J.   Identification 
 
 1.  All cattle or bison tested shall be officially identifi ed at the time an official tuberculosis test is conducted. 
 
 2.   Cattle or bison moved in channels of tr ade within a State or zone shall be individually identified as 
approved by the Chief State Animal Health Official and recorded as to origin and destination at the first 
concentration point (dealer, livestock auction, stockyard, etc.) as follows: 
 
 a.  Cattle or bison over 2 years of  age that
Text Len: 1778
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 or bison moved in channels of tr ade within a State or zone shall be individually identified as 
approved by the Chief State Animal Health Official and recorded as to origin and destination at the first 
concentration point (dealer, livestock auction, stockyard, etc.) as follows: 
 
 a.  Cattle or bison over 2 years of  age that are returned to farms or ranches shall be identified by official 
eartag, backtag, premises identification number, or by an official brand.  If identified by brand, the 
cattle or bison must be accompanied by a completed official brand release document acceptable to 
the Chief State Animal Health Official. 
 
  b.   Cattle or bison that are marketed for immedi ate slaughter shall be identified by eartag, sale tag,
    or official backtag.  A completed official brand release document that is acceptable to the Chief
    State Animal Health Official may be used to identify  lots of animals having a single origin that are
    shipped directly to slaughter. 
 
 
K.  Dealer Registration and Recordkeeping 
 
Any dealer who purchases, deals in, or sells cattle or bison; or who acts as a commission representative or 
broker; or who operates and conducts an auction in which cattle or bison are sold, must be registered or  
licensed with the appropriate State agency and maintain the records required to facilitate the traceback of 
affected, exposed, suspect, or reactor animals by State animal health officials to the herd of origin or other  
 
                                                      
Text Len: 1537
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
affected, exposed, suspect, or reactor animals by State animal health officials to the herd of origin or other  
 
                                                                                                                                                                     12 
point of original infection.  Such records must be maintained for a minimum of 2 years as of January 1, 2005;  
3 years as of January 1, 2006; 4 years as of January 1, 2007; and 5 years as of January 1, 2008.  Such records 
must be made available to State or Federal animal health officials, upon request, during normal business hours. 
 
 1.   Dealer registration—The State agen cy shall have authority, after due notice and after providing an 
opportunity for a hearing to the individual or firm involved, to deny an application for registration and to 
suspend or cancel the registration when the agency is satisfied that one or more of the following 
conditions prevail: 
 
  a.   There is adequate evidence to establish intent to violate or circumvent recordkeeping  
    requirements of this section, other animal health regulations, or both. 
 
  b.  There is
Text Len: 1150
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 registration and to 
suspend or cancel the registration when the agency is satisfied that one or more of the following 
conditions prevail: 
 
  a.   There is adequate evidence to establish intent to violate or circumvent recordkeeping  
    requirements of this section, other animal health regulations, or both. 
 
  b.  There is a demonstrated history of repeat ed inability to trace to the point of origin those 
    affected, exposed, suspect,  or reactor animals handled by the dealer. 
 
A brand law or regulation that accomplishes the traceback purposes of this section will be considered an 
acceptable alternative to dealer registration.  Acceptance of this alternative will be based on an overall review, 
conducted by the Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist and/or an APHIS program review team, of the 
provisions and accomplishments of the State program in achieving the effective traceback of all animals to 
the herd of origin or other point of original exposure. 
 
 2.   Violations/remedies—Provisions shall exist for State animal health officials to take such action as 
necessary to enforce compliance with any provision of the recommended procedures discussed in these 
UM&R.  This shall include the authority to subpoena persons and/or records in violation of these 
minimum standards as well as authority for the appropriate State officials to petition the local court having 
venue for an order to enforce such subpoenas.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                  
Text Len: 1529
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     13
Part III — Standard Procedures (Minimum Requirements) 
 
 
 
A.  Classification of cattle and bison tested 
 
 1.   CFT test—All responses shall be recorded and the animal classified as suspect unless, in the 
professional judgment of the testing veterinarian and/or the DTE, the reactor classification is indicated. 
 
 2.   CT test—All animals with a response shall be classified as reactors. 
 
 3.   CCT test—Responses shall be recorded and plotted on the CCT scattergram (VS Form 6–22D).  
Classification shall be according to the zone in which the animal is plotted (negative, suspect, or reactor); 
however, animals plotting in the suspect zone on two successive CCT tests shall be classified reactor.  
 
Exceptions to the classification listed above may occur when animals plotting in the reactor zone or plotting in the 
Text Len: 1028
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
VS Form 6–22D).  
Classification shall be according to the zone in which the animal is plotted (negative, suspect, or reactor); 
however, animals plotting in the suspect zone on two successive CCT tests shall be classified reactor.  
 
Exceptions to the classification listed above may occur when animals plotting in the reactor zone or plotting in the 
suspect zone on two consecutive CCT tests are, at the discretion of the DTE or Regional Tuberculosis 
Epidemiologist, reclassified as suspect, provided that there has been no known association of the herd with  
M. bovis.  Animals classified as suspect in these situations must be moved directly to slaughter under permit.  
The postmortem examination shall be witnessed by a State or Federal animal health veterinarian in addition to 
the attending FSIS or State meat inspection veterinarian.  Specimens, to include any tissue with granulomatous 
appearing lesions and representative head and thoracic lymph nodes, must be submitted for laboratory 
examination.  If such suspects fail to disclose gross evidence of bovine tuberculosis, are negative on 
histopathology and bacteriological cultures for M. bovis, and a complete epidemiologic investigation, including a 
herd test of all eligible animals, fails to disclose evidence of bovine tuberculosis or exposure thereto, the herd, 
with the concurrence of the DTE and the Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist, may be considered free of bovine 
tuberculosis.  Any additional exceptions by the DTE and the Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist may be made 
only with the concurrence of the National Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
 
 4.  The bovine interferon gamma assay, when  approved for use as an official tuberculosis test in the State  
  by the Chief
Text Len: 1761
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ovine 
tuberculosis.  Any additional exceptions by the DTE and the Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist may be made 
only with the concurrence of the National Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
 
 4.  The bovine interferon gamma assay, when  approved for use as an official tuberculosis test in the State  
  by the Chief State Animal Health Official and AVIC  may, at the discretion of the DTE and with the 
concurrence of a VS Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist, be used in cattle herds as follows: 
 
  a.   In parallel testing with the CCT test. 
 
  b.   As a replacement for the CCT test for retest ing CFT test suspects.  (CCT test suspects must be
   retested negative on the CCT test prior to  reclassifying such suspects as negative.) 
 
c. In parallel with the CFT test or CT test  in affected herds. 
  
 Results of the bovine interferon gamma assay shall be reported by the testing laboratory to the appropriate 
DTE and/or Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist for classification.  Animals positive on a single bovine 
interferon gamma assay should be classified as suspect unless the DTE or the Regional Tuberculosis 
Epidemiologist determines that a reactor classification is justified.  Animals positive on two successive bovine 
interferon gamma assays should be classified as reactor; exceptions to a reactor classification must be 
justified and documented by the DTE or Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
        
       5.  Reclassification of animals—When a herd test results in the confirmation of bovine tuberculosis, all 
responders on the initial
Text Len: 1573
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ays should be classified as reactor; exceptions to a reactor classification must be 
justified and documented by the DTE or Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
        
       5.  Reclassification of animals—When a herd test results in the confirmation of bovine tuberculosis, all 
responders on the initial CFT test shall be reclassified as suspects or reactors.  Such animals shall be 
promptly identified and subjected to postmortem examination under the direct supervision of a State or 
Federal animal health veterinarian. 
 
B.  Reporting of tests 
 
A report of all approved tuberculosis tests shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements of the 
cooperating State and Federal animal health officials.  The report shall include the official identification, age, sex, 
and breed of each animal and a record of all responses and test interpretations. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     14 
C.  Disposition of tuberculin-responding cattle and bison 
 
 1.   Reactors shall remain on the premises where
Text Len: 1151
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                              14 
C.  Disposition of tuberculin-responding cattle and bison 
 
 1.   Reactors shall remain on the premises where they were disclosed until a State or Federal permit for 
movement has been obtained.  Movement for immediate slaughter shall be within 15 days of 
classification and shall be directly to a slaughtering establishment where approved State or Federal 
inspection is maintained.  Alternatively, the animals may be destroyed on the premises or in a 
postmortem examination facility under the direct supervision of a State or Federal animal health 
veterinarian to ensure that a proper postmortem examination is conducted; that the carcasses are 
disposed of by deep burial or burning, and that the facilities are adequately cleaned and disinfected. 
 
 2.   Herds containing suspects to the CFT test shall be quarantined until the suspect animals are: 
 
  a.   Negative to a CCT test; or 
 
  b.  Negative on the bovine interferon gamma assa y (when approved for use as stipulated in Part III, 
A.4.); or  
 
  c.  Shipped, under permit, directly to slaught er in accordance with State and Federal laws and 
   regulations with postmortem examinatio ns conducted as outlined in Part III, C.5. 
 
 3.   Suspects to the CCT  test must be: 
 
  a.   Negative to a  CCT retest 60 or more days after the previous CCT injection; or 
 
  b
Text Len: 1389
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Federal laws and 
   regulations with postmortem examinatio ns conducted as outlined in Part III, C.5. 
 
 3.   Suspects to the CCT  test must be: 
 
  a.   Negative to a  CCT retest 60 or more days after the previous CCT injection; or 
 
  b.   Shipped under permit directly to slaughter. 
 
 4. Animals positive on the bovine interferon gamma assay and classified as suspect must be: 
  
 a. Negative on a  bovine interferon gamma assay retest conducted within 30 days of the CFT injection 
(the DTE or Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist must concur with the retest); or 
 
 b. Shipped, under permit, directly to slaughter for postmortem examination. 
 
 5.   Postmortem examinations shall be witnessed by a State or Federal animal health veterinarian and 
   selected tissue specimens, to include any tissue with granulomatous appearing lesions and 
  representative head and thoracic lymph nodes, must be submitted for laboratory examination. 
 
D.  Interstate or interzone movement requirements for tuberculosis (cattle or bison not known to be 
affected with or exposed to tuberculosis)   Note:  See Appendix A for an abbreviated outline of test 
requirements for cattle or bison from nonaccredited herds, other than commuter herds, being moved for breeding 
or feeding purposes.  See Appendix B for an abbreviated outline of test requirements for cattle or bison from 
accredited herds being moved for breeding or feeding purposes. 
       
 1.   From Accredited-free States or zones:  cattle or  bison that originate in an Accredited-free State or
Text Len: 1558
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 being moved for breeding 
or feeding purposes.  See Appendix B for an abbreviated outline of test requirements for cattle or bison from 
accredited herds being moved for breeding or feeding purposes. 
       
 1.   From Accredited-free States or zones:  cattle or  bison that originate in an Accredited-free State or zone 
may be moved interstate with no restrictions for tuberculosis.  
 
 2.   From Modified Accredited Advanced States or zones:   
 
a. The cattle or bison are moved directly to slau ghter at an approved slaughtering establishment, or are 
either officially identified or identified by an official premises identification number and are moved 
through one approved livestock facility and then direct to an approved slaughtering establishment.  
  
  b.   The cattle or bison are sexually intact heif ers moved directly to an approved feedlot, or are moved 
through one approved livestock facility and then direct to an approved feedlot, or are steers or spayed 
heifers; and are either officially identified or identified by an official premises identification number. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                               
Text Len: 1237
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                      15
  c.  The cattle or bison are from an accredited herd and are accompanied by a certificate stating that
   the accredited herd completed the testing ne cessary for Accredited status with negative results
   within 2 years prior to the date of movement. 
 
  d.  The cattle or bison are sexually intact animals that:  (1) are not from an accredited herd or a 
commuter herd; (2) are officially identified or are identified by an official premises identification 
number; and (3) are accompanied by a certificate stating that the animals included in the movement 
that are 18 months of age and older, tested negative to an official tuberculosis test conducted within 
60 days prior to the date of movement.  Except that:  the individual animal(s) to be moved need not 
be retested if they were included on a negative herd of origin herd test conducted within 6 months of 
the interstate movement. 
  
 3.   From Modified Accredited States or zones: 
 
  a.   The cattle or bison are moved directly to slaughter at an approved slaughtering establishment, or are 
either officially identified or identified by an official premises identification number and are moved 
through one approved livestock facility and then direct to an approved slaughtering establishment. 
 
b. The cattle or bison are sexually intact heifers moved
Text Len: 1427
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
: 
 
  a.   The cattle or bison are moved directly to slaughter at an approved slaughtering establishment, or are 
either officially identified or identified by an official premises identification number and are moved 
through one approved livestock facility and then direct to an approved slaughtering establishment. 
 
b. The cattle or bison are sexually intact heifers moved directly to an approved feedlot, or are moved 
through one approved livestock facility and then direct to an approved feedlot, or are steers or spayed 
heifers; are either officially identified or identified by an official premises identification number and are 
accompanied by a certificate stating that the animals included in the movement that are 2 months of 
age and older were classified negative to an official tuberculosis test conducted within 60 days prior 
to the date of movement. 
 
  c.  The cattle or bison are from an accredited herd and are accompanied by a certificate stating that
   the accredited herd completed the testing ne cessary for Accredited status with negative results
   within 1 year prior to the date of movement. 
 
  d.  The cattle or bison are sexually intact animals that:  (1) are not from an accredited herd or a 
commuter herd; (2) are officially identified or are identified by an official premises identification 
number; (3) are accompanied by a certificate stating that they are from a herd of origin that was 
negative to an official tuberculosis herd test of all cattle and bison 12 months of age and older 
conducted within 1 year prior to the date of movement; and (4) that the individual animal(s) to be 
moved that are 2 months of age and older tested negative to an additional official tuberculosis test 
conducted within 60 days prior to the date of movement.  Except that:  the additional test
Text Len: 1825
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 all cattle and bison 12 months of age and older 
conducted within 1 year prior to the date of movement; and (4) that the individual animal(s) to be 
moved that are 2 months of age and older tested negative to an additional official tuberculosis test 
conducted within 60 days prior to the date of movement.  Except that:  the additional test is not 
required if the animal(s) are moved interstate or interzone within 60 days following the herd of origin 
herd test and provided the animals to be moved that are two months of age and older were included 
on the herd of origin herd test. 
        
 4.   From Accreditation Preparatory States or zones: 
 
  a.  The cattle or bison are moved directly to sl aughter at an approved slaughtering establishment, or are 
either officially identified or are identified by an official premises identification number and are moved 
through one approved livestock facility and then direct to an approved slaughtering establishment. 
 
  b.  The cattle or bison are sexually intact heifers moved directly to  an approved feedlot, or are moved                       
through one approved livestock facility and then direct to an approved feedlot, or are steers or spayed 
heifers; are either officially identified or identified by an official premises identification number and are 
accompanied by a certificate stating that they are from a herd of origin that was negative to a herd 
test conducted within 1 year prior to the date of movement and that the individual animal(s) to be 
moved tested negative to an official tuberculosis test conducted within 60 days prior to the date of 
movement.  Except that:  the additional test is not
Text Len: 1676
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 are 
accompanied by a certificate stating that they are from a herd of origin that was negative to a herd 
test conducted within 1 year prior to the date of movement and that the individual animal(s) to be 
moved tested negative to an official tuberculosis test conducted within 60 days prior to the date of 
movement.  Except that:  the additional test is not required if the animal(s) to be moved are moved 
interstate or interzone within 60 days following the herd of origin herd test and provided the animals 
to be moved were included on the herd of origin herd test. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     16 
  c.   The cattle or bison are from an accredited herd; are officially identified; and are accompanied by
   a certificate stating that the accredited he rd completed the testing necessary with negative 
   results within 1 year prior to the date of movement and that the animal(s) to be moved were 
   negative to an official tuberculosis test c onducted within 60 days prior to the date of movement. 
      
Text Len: 1157
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
; and are accompanied by
   a certificate stating that the accredited he rd completed the testing necessary with negative 
   results within 1 year prior to the date of movement and that the animal(s) to be moved were 
   negative to an official tuberculosis test c onducted within 60 days prior to the date of movement. 
                     
 5.  From nonaccredited States or zones:  may be move d interstate or interzone only if the cattle or bison are 
accompanied by VS Form 1-27 and are moved interstate or interzone in an officially sealed means of 
conveyance directly to an approved slaughtering establishment for immediate slaughter. 
 
 6.   Cattle or bison that are members of a recogn ized and approved commuter herd may be moved interstate 
or interzone in accordance with the applicable commuter herd agreement.   
 
 No cattle or bison  responding to an official tuberculosis test are eligible for interstate movement unless such 
animal(s) are subsequently classified “negative for M. bovis” based upon an official CCT test and/or bovine 
interferon gamma assay.  (Note:  9 CFR, Section 77.17 (c), prohibits the interstate movement of suspect 
cattle and bison and negative cattle or bison in herds containing suspect cattle or bison (except for slaughter) 
until the tuberculosis status of all suspect(s) has been determined.) 
 
E.  Procedures in tuberculosis-affected herds 
 
Disclosure of tuberculosis in any herd shall be followed by a complete epidemiologic investigation.  All cattle 
and/or bison in herds from which tuberculosis-affected cattle and/or bison originate, and all cattle and/or
Text Len: 1617
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
until the tuberculosis status of all suspect(s) has been determined.) 
 
E.  Procedures in tuberculosis-affected herds 
 
Disclosure of tuberculosis in any herd shall be followed by a complete epidemiologic investigation.  All cattle 
and/or bison in herds from which tuberculosis-affected cattle and/or bison originate, and all cattle and/or bison 
that are known to have associated with affected cattle and/or bison, shall be tested promptly.  These procedures 
shall apply to adjacent and contact herds as well as to the evaluation and testing of possible source herds for the 
affected herd.  Herds that have received exposed animals shall be tested following the slaughter or testing of 
exposed animals.  Every effort shall be made to ensure the immediate elimination of the disease from all species 
of livestock on the premises.  The first consideration in affected herds is the depopulation of the entire herd.  If 
depopulation cannot be accomplished, the herd shall be handled as outlined in Part III, J. 
 
F.  Procedures in tuberculosis-affected feedlots 
 
A tuberculosis-affected feedlot shall be handled in the same manner as an affected herd in regard to 
epidemiologic investigation and the development of epidemiologic tracings for animal movements into and out of 
the feedlot.  Emphasis during investigations and testing shall be on detecting possible spread from the feedlot.  
Cattle and bison in feedlots known to be exposed to tuberculosis shall be quarantined and shipped under permit 
directly to slaughter.  Feedlots or portions of feedlots that have contained tuberculosis infected and exposed cattle 
or bison shall be vacated, cleaned, and disinfected following the removal of such cattle or bison to slaughter.  
Restocking a feedlot, or portion
Text Len: 1777
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 feedlots known to be exposed to tuberculosis shall be quarantined and shipped under permit 
directly to slaughter.  Feedlots or portions of feedlots that have contained tuberculosis infected and exposed cattle 
or bison shall be vacated, cleaned, and disinfected following the removal of such cattle or bison to slaughter.  
Restocking a feedlot, or portion of a feedlot that has contained tuberculosis infected and exposed cattle or bison, 
shall not begin until the required cleaning and disinfection have been completed and the feedlot or portion of the 
feedlot that contained infected cattle or bison has been vacant of all livestock for a minimum of 30 days. Except 
that: Approved feedlots and approved pens are exempt from the requirement to hold pens vacant for 30 days 
following the required cleaning and disinfection. 
 
G.  International movement requirements for tuberculosis (cattle or bison not known to be affected with 
or exposed to tuberculosis) 
 
No cattle or bison responding to an official tuberculosis test are eligible for international movement.  The testing 
protocol for international movement shall be in accordance with the tuberculosis test requirements of 9 CFR, 
Section 91.5, and with the tuberculosis test requirements of the receiving countries. 
 
H.  Identification of reactor cattle and bison 
 
Reactor cattle and bison shall be identified by branding the letter “T” on the left hip near the tailhead, not less than 
2 inches (5 cm) and not more than 3 inches (7.5 cm) high, and by tagging with an approved metal eartag bearing 
a serial number and inscription “U.S. Reactor” or a similar State reactor tag suitably attached to the left ear of 
each animal.  Such reactors may be shipped to slaughter under permit.
Text Len: 1756
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
2 inches (5 cm) and not more than 3 inches (7.5 cm) high, and by tagging with an approved metal eartag bearing 
a serial number and inscription “U.S. Reactor” or a similar State reactor tag suitably attached to the left ear of 
each animal.  Such reactors may be shipped to slaughter under permit.  In lieu of branding, the reactor(s) may be 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     17
shipped, under permit, to slaughter in an officially sealed vehicle or accompanied to slaughter by a State or 
Federal animal health official, provided the letters “TB” are applied to the left hip with yellow paint.    
 
I.   Identification of exposed cattle, bison, and other livestock 
 
 1. To be eligible for Federal indemnity, exposed cattle and bison shall be identified by branding the 
 letter “S” on the left hip near the tailhead, not less than 2 inches (5 cm) and not more than 3 inches (7.5
 cm) high, and by tagging
Text Len: 1044
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Identification of exposed cattle, bison, and other livestock 
 
 1. To be eligible for Federal indemnity, exposed cattle and bison shall be identified by branding the 
 letter “S” on the left hip near the tailhead, not less than 2 inches (5 cm) and not more than 3 inches (7.5
 cm) high, and by tagging with an approved metal eartag bearing a serial number attached to either
 ear of each animal.  Such exposed animals must be shipped to slaughter under permit.   In lieu of  
branding, the letter “S” may be applied to the left hip of exposed cattle and bison with yellow paint.  Such 
nonbranded animals must be accompanied to slaughter by a State or Federal representative or be 
shipped under permit in a vehicle closed with official seals. 
 
 2.  To be eligible for Federal indemnity, other expos ed livestock shall be identified by tagging with a serially 
numbered metal eartag attached to either ear.  All such animals to be destroyed shall be transported, 
under permit, to the place of destruction in vehicles closed with official seals or shall be accompanied to 
the place of destruction by a Federal or State representative.  Animals may be destroyed and disposed of 
under the direct supervision of a Federal or State representative on the premises where the animals were 
exposed.  
 
J.   Quarantine procedures 
 
 1.   All herds in which reactor animals are discl osed shall be quarantined immediately.  Exposed animals 
must remain on the premises where disclosed unless a State or Federal permit for movement has been 
obtained.  Movement of animals for immediate slaughter must be shipped directly to a slaughtering 
establishment where approved State or Federal inspection is administered.  Exposed animals must be 
identified
Text Len: 1749
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 herds in which reactor animals are discl osed shall be quarantined immediately.  Exposed animals 
must remain on the premises where disclosed unless a State or Federal permit for movement has been 
obtained.  Movement of animals for immediate slaughter must be shipped directly to a slaughtering 
establishment where approved State or Federal inspection is administered.  Exposed animals must be 
identified by official eartags.  The “S” branding of exposed animals is required unless the letter “S” is 
applied to the left hip with yellow paint and the animals are shipped in a sealed vehicle under permit or, in 
lieu of sealing the vehicle, the animals are accompanied to slaughter by a State or Federal 
representative. 
 
 2.   Sale of feeder calves from quarantined herds sh all be restricted.  Feeder calves under 12 months of age 
that have passed a CFT test within 60 days may be permitted to move intrastate (to include between 
zones within the same State) to an approved feedlot. 
  
 3.   Herds in which M. bovis infection has been confirmed shall remain under quarantine, if not depopulated, 
until all requirements of an individual herd plan have been completed.  The herd testing requirement shall 
consist of at least two consecutive tests of the herd in which all responders to a primary diagnostic test 
(CT or CFT tests) have been examined postmortem with no evidence of M. bovis infection, followed by 
six consecutive tests of the herd in which all responders to a primary diagnostic test (CFT test only) have 
been classified negative to a supplemental test(s) (CCT test, bovine interferon gamma assay) and/or 
postmortem procedures.  The testing intervals for the eight required herd tests
Text Len: 1714
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 evidence of M. bovis infection, followed by 
six consecutive tests of the herd in which all responders to a primary diagnostic test (CFT test only) have 
been classified negative to a supplemental test(s) (CCT test, bovine interferon gamma assay) and/or 
postmortem procedures.  The testing intervals for the eight required herd tests for quarantine release are 
as follows:  (1) at least 60 days between tests for the first four herd tests; (2) at least 180 days between 
the fourth and fifth herd test; and (3) at least 12 months between tests for the sixth through eighth herd 
tests.  If the herd is located in an area where M. bovis is known to affect one or more species of wildlife, 
the herd will not be released from quarantine prior to implementation of the provisions of a herd plan that 
is designed to mitigate the potential for exposure and that is approved by the DTE and the Regional 
Tuberculosis Epidemiologist.  All animals moved from the premises prior to being released from 
quarantine shall be shipped directly to slaughter and shall be accompanied by a permit issued by a State 
or Federal representative.  The herd must undergo two additional negative annual herd tests after the 
quarantine is released.  The two required postquarantine release tests may be applied to accreditation 
status. 
 
 4.  Herds in which only NGL reactor(s) occur and selected tissues, to include representative head and 
thoracic lymph nodes, are found negative on histopathology, and in which no evidence of M. bovis 
infection has been disclosed, may be released from quarantine only after a negative retest of the entire 
 
                     
Text Len: 1653
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 to include representative head and 
thoracic lymph nodes, are found negative on histopathology, and in which no evidence of M. bovis 
infection has been disclosed, may be released from quarantine only after a negative retest of the entire 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     18 
herd is completed at least 60 days subsequent to slaughter of the NGL reactors, unless such retest is 
exempted by the DTE in consultation with the Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
 
 5.   Herds in which at least one suspect and no reactor animals are disclosed shall be quarantined until
  all suspects are retested and classified negative, or shipped directly to slaughter under permit and
  no evidence of M. bovis infection is disclosed. 
  
If animals are slaughtered as suspects according to Part III, A., but show no gross lesions and selected 
tissues, to include representative head and thoracic lymph nodes, are found negative on histopathology 
and bacteriological culture for M. bovis and a complete epidemiologic investigation, including a herd test
Text Len: 1180
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. bovis infection is disclosed. 
  
If animals are slaughtered as suspects according to Part III, A., but show no gross lesions and selected 
tissues, to include representative head and thoracic lymph nodes, are found negative on histopathology 
and bacteriological culture for M. bovis and a complete epidemiologic investigation, including a herd test 
of all eligible animals, fails to disclose evidence of bovine tuberculosis or exposure thereto, the herd, with 
the concurrence of the DTE and Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist, may be considered free of bovine 
tuberculosis.  A 90-120 day herd retest is recommended. 
 
 6.   Herds indicated as the source(s) of slaughter  traceback case investigations shall be placed under 
  quarantine within 15  days of notification, and a herd test of all eligible livestock shall be scheduled. 
 
The testing of source herds of regular kill animals having lesions of bovine tuberculosis shall be done by 
State or Federal animal health veterinarians.  When slaughter and marketing records provide strong 
evidence that traces to the herd of origin, all animals responding to the CFT test shall be classified as 
reactors.  In all other cases, with approval of the DTE or Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist, the CCT 
test and/or bovine interferon gamma assay may be used to classify responders to the CFT test. 
 
 7.   Testing of source herds of reactors disclosed in affected herds shall be by State or Federal regulatory 
veterinarians using the CFT test procedure.  Responding animals may be classified as reactors or, if 
classified as suspects, may be retested by the CCT test and/or the bovine interferon gamma assay. 
  

Text Len: 1678
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 7.   Testing of source herds of reactors disclosed in affected herds shall be by State or Federal regulatory 
veterinarians using the CFT test procedure.  Responding animals may be classified as reactors or, if 
classified as suspects, may be retested by the CCT test and/or the bovine interferon gamma assay. 
  
 8. Herds containing known bovine tuberculosis expo sed animal(s) shall be placed under quarantine until the 
tuberculosis status of the exposed animal(s) has been determined by postmortem examination or by at 
least one negative CT test and the remainder of the test eligible animals in the herd are determined to be 
negative following an official CFT test. 
 
K.   Retest schedules for high-risk herds  
 
 1.  In herds with a history of lesions suggestive of bovine tuberculosis (but not confirmed), two negative 
annual herd tests shall be conducted after the herd is released from quarantine.  The first test is to be 
applied approximately 1 year after release from quarantine. 
 
 2.  In a newly assembled herd on premises wher e a tuberculosis-affected herd has been depopulated, two 
negative annual herd tests shall be applied to all cattle, bison, and other livestock.  The first test must be 
applied approximately 6 months after assembly of the new herd.  The exclusion of any species from 
these herd test requirements must be approved by the DTE or Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist.  If 
the premises are vacated for over 1 year, these test requirements can be waived by the DTE or the 
Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
 
 3.   Exposed animals previously sold from a known-a ffected herd shall be depopulated with
Text Len: 1655
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 test requirements must be approved by the DTE or Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist.  If 
the premises are vacated for over 1 year, these test requirements can be waived by the DTE or the 
Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
 
 3.   Exposed animals previously sold from a known-a ffected herd shall be depopulated with indemnity if at all 
possible.  If the exposed animal(s) are not depopulated, only the CT test shall be used as the initial test.  
All responding animals shall be classified as reactors.  If negative to the initial test, the exposed animal(s) 
will subsequently be handled as if they were a part of the affected herd of origin in respect to quarantine, 
testing for quarantine release, and the two negative annual tests following release from quarantine.  The 
remainder of the herd shall be tested as outlined in (b) below and, if negative, retested in 1 year with the 
CFT test.  The receiving herd shall initially be tested as follows: 
 
  a.   If lesions of tuberculosi s (based on histopathologic examination) are found in the exposed animal(s), 
and/or M. bovis is isolated from tissues submitted from exposed animal(s) for bacteriological 
examination, the remainder of the herd shall be depopulated or tested, preferably with the CT test. 
 
 
                                                                                  
Text Len: 1361
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                                                                   19
  b.  In all other cases, the remainder of the herd  shall be tested by the CFT test.  The responding animals 
may be classified as suspects and retested with the CCT test and/or the bovine interferon gamma 
assay. 
 4.   In herds where M. bovis infection has been confirmed but the herd has not been depopulated, testing 
shall be in accordance with Part III, J. 3.  
 
L.   Surveillance around an M. bovis affected herd where wildlife are known to be affected  
 
All livestock herds, within a 10-mile radius, will be tested within 6 months of any diagnosis of bovine tuberculosis 
in livestock or free ranging wildlife. 
 
                                                                 
Text Len: 857
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ine tuberculosis 
in livestock or free ranging wildlife. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     20 
Part IV — Accredited Herd Plan for Cattle or Bison 
 
 
 
A. Animals to be tested—Testing of herds for accreditation or reaccreditation shall include all  
 test eligible cattle or bison as follows:   
 
 1. In Accredited Free States or zones:  all cattle or  bison 24 months of age and older as evidenced by the 
central incisors being fully erupted and in wear.   
 
 2.  In Modified Accredited Advanced States or zone s:  all cattle or bison 18 months of age and older as 
evidenced by the loss of the central deciduous incisors.  
 
 3. In Modified Accredited States or zones:  all cattle or bison 12 months of age and older. 
 
 4. In Accreditation Preparatory States or zones:  all cattle and bison regardless of age. 
 
(Note:  The animals required to be tested in
Text Len: 1000
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 the loss of the central deciduous incisors.  
 
 3. In Modified Accredited States or zones:  all cattle or bison 12 months of age and older. 
 
 4. In Accreditation Preparatory States or zones:  all cattle and bison regardless of age. 
 
(Note:  The animals required to be tested in herds being tested for accreditation or reaccreditation in States 
having more than one status [split status state(s)] shall be the same for the whole State and shall be that of 
the lowest status of any zone within the State.) 
  
In previously affected herds that have been released from quarantine following the testing protocol outlined in 
Part III, J.3., the two required negative annual herd tests postquarantine release may be used to qualify the 
herd for accreditation.   
 
 All purchased additions shall be individually identifi ed and recorded on the test report as purchased additions 
 (PA) members of the herd at the ti me of the annual or biennial test. 
 
B.  Accreditation and reaccreditation —To qualify for Accredited herd status, the herd must pass at least two 
consecutive official tuberculosis tests conducted within an interval of 9-15 months with no evidence of bovine 
tuberculosis.  All animals must be bona fide members of the herd.  Additions to the herd during the qualifying 
period for accreditation, other than natural additions, must meet the requirements specified in Part IV, C.  
Herds meeting the qualifications for accreditation shall be issued a certificate of accreditation and other 
appropriate information shall be provided by the local State and Federal animal health officials to emphasize 
the significance of the herd-accreditation plan.   
 
In Accredited-free and Modified Accredited
Text Len: 1719
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 natural additions, must meet the requirements specified in Part IV, C.  
Herds meeting the qualifications for accreditation shall be issued a certificate of accreditation and other 
appropriate information shall be provided by the local State and Federal animal health officials to emphasize 
the significance of the herd-accreditation plan.   
 
In Accredited-free and Modified Accredited Advanced States or zones, the accreditation period will be 24 
months from the anniversary date and not 24 months from the date of the reaccreditation test.  To qualify for 
reaccreditation, the herd must pass a negative test within 21-27 months of the anniversary date. 
 
In Modified Accredited and Accreditation Preparatory States or zones, the accreditation period will be 12 
months from the anniversary date and not 12 months from the date of the reaccreditation test.  To qualify for 
reaccreditation, the herd must pass a test within 9-15 months of the anniversary date. 
 
For continuous herd accreditation, the reaccreditation test must be conducted on the anniversary date or 
within a time period of 3 months prior to the anniversary date.  If the reaccreditation test is conducted 
following the anniversary date, the Accredited status of the herd will be suspended until the reaccreditation 
test is completed.  If the reaccreditation test is not competed within 3 months following the anniversary date, 
the requirements for reaccrediting the herd will be the same as for initial herd accreditation. 
 
The DTE and Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist must jointly certify, in writing, that herds applying for 
Accreditation status, which are located in States or zones with wildlife reservoirs of bovine tuberculosis and/or 
States or zones with a tuberculosis status of Modified Accredited or lower, have taken adequate precautions 
and have
Text Len: 1849
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 as for initial herd accreditation. 
 
The DTE and Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist must jointly certify, in writing, that herds applying for 
Accreditation status, which are located in States or zones with wildlife reservoirs of bovine tuberculosis and/or 
States or zones with a tuberculosis status of Modified Accredited or lower, have taken adequate precautions 
and have in place appropriate biosecurity measures, which have been documented in a written herd plan, that 
ensure the herd has not been exposed to bovine tuberculosis during the accreditation process and will not be 
exposed to bovine tuberculosis following accreditation.  Minimal biosecurity requirements in the herd plan for 
herds applying for accreditation status in States or zones, with wildlife reservoirs of M. bovis must include 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     21
specific provisions for protecting livestock feeding sites and feed storage areas from being contaminated by 
M. bovis and provide effective strategies to reduce or divert wildlife populations from entering the premises of 
the accredited herd. 
 
C.  Additions—Accredited
Text Len: 1255
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        21
specific provisions for protecting livestock feeding sites and feed storage areas from being contaminated by 
M. bovis and provide effective strategies to reduce or divert wildlife populations from entering the premises of 
the accredited herd. 
 
C.  Additions—Accredited herd additions must or iginate directly from such herds as outlined  
 below and must meet the minimum tuberculosis test requirements as indicated:  
 
            Origin of Herd Addition(s)                                         Tuberculosis Test Requirement 
 
 
 1.   Accredited herd in a State or zone  No tuberculosis test requirement on the  
  recognized as Accredited-free within the  individual animal(s) addition(s). 
  past 5 years 
 
 2.   Accredited herd in a State or zone           Official negative tuberculosis test on the  
  not recognized as Accredited-free within i ndividual animal(s) addition(s) within 60  
  the past 5 years days prior to entering the premises of the  
  receiving accredited herd. 
 
 3.   Nonaccredited herd in an Accredited-fr ee Official negative tuberculosis test on the  
  State or zone     individual animal(s) addition(s) within 60  
        days prior to entering the premises of the  
        receiving accredited herd. 
 
 4. Non
Text Len: 1284
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Nonaccredited herd in an Accredited-fr ee Official negative tuberculosis test on the  
  State or zone     individual animal(s) addition(s) within 60  
        days prior to entering the premises of the  
        receiving accredited herd. 
 
 4. Nonaccredited  herd in a Modified Accredited  The herd of origin for the addition(s) must 
  Advanced State or zone recognized as  have received a negative herd test of all  
  Accredited-free within the past 5 years  cattle and bison 18 months of age or older 
        within the past 12 months.  Also, the 
individual animal(s) for addition that are   
2 months of age and older must have a  
negative tuberculosis test within 60 days  
prior to entering the premises of the  
accredited herd. 
 
 5. Nonaccredited  herd in a Modified Accredited  The herd of origin for the addition(s) must 
  Advanced State or zone not recognized   have received a negative herd test of all 
  as Accredited-free within the past 5 year s cattle and bison regardless of age (unless 
  under 6 months of age and nursing a 
  negative dam) within the past 12 months. 
  Also, the individual animal(s) for addition 
  that are 2 months of age and older must  
  have a negative tuberculosis test within 60  
  days prior to entering the premises of the 
       a c c r e d i t e d  h e r d .  
 
 6.   Nonaccredited  herd in a Modified Accredited  The herd
Text Len: 1388
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  that are 2 months of age and older must  
  have a negative tuberculosis test within 60  
  days prior to entering the premises of the 
       a c c r e d i t e d  h e r d .  
 
 6.   Nonaccredited  herd in a Modified Accredited  The herd of origin for the addition(s) must 
  State or zone recognized as Accredited-free    have received a negative herd test of all 
  within the past 5 years cattle and bison 12 months of age or older 
  within the past 12 months.  Also, the  
individual animal(s) for addition that are 2  
months of age and older must have a  
negative tuberculosis test within 60 days  
prior to entering the premises of the  
accredited herd.  The individual animal(s)  
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     22 
            Origin of Herd Addition(s) 
Text Len: 912
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         22 
            Origin of Herd Addition(s)                                          Tuberculosis Test Requirement 
 
for addition must also be isolated (geographic 
separation) from all members of the accredited  
herd until they are negative to a tuberculosis  
test conducted no sooner than 60 days from  
the date of entry onto the premises of the  
accredited herd. 
  
 7. Nonaccredited herd in a Modified Accredited The herd of origin for the addition(s) must 
  State or zone not recognized as Accredited- have received a negative herd test of all cattle  
  free within the past 5 years and bison regardless of age (unless under 6  
   months of age and nursing a negative dam)  
   within the past 12 months.  Also, the individual  
   animal(s) for addition that are 2 months of age 
   and older must have a negative tuberculosis  
   test within 60 days prior to entering the premises  
   of the accredited herd.  The individual animal(s)  
   for addition must also be isolated (geographic  
   separation) from all members of the accredited  
   herd until they are negative to a tuberculosis  
   retest conducted no sooner than
Text Len: 1201
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   test within 60 days prior to entering the premises  
   of the accredited herd.  The individual animal(s)  
   for addition must also be isolated (geographic  
   separation) from all members of the accredited  
   herd until they are negative to a tuberculosis  
   retest conducted no sooner than 60 days from  
   the date of entry onto the premises of the  
   accredited herd. 
 
 8. Nonaccredited herd in an Accreditation No  provisions for additions from nonaccredited 
  Preparatory State or zone herds.  A dditions must originate from Accredited  
   herds. 
    
  Animals added under (3), (4), (5), (6) or (7) in this section shall not receive Accredited herd 
  status for sale purposes until they have been me mbers of the herd at least 60 days and after being 
  retested with a negative result 60 or more days afte r entry.  In the case of animals added under (6)  
  or (7), Accredited herd status for sale purposes would not occur until such animals were retested 
  with a negative result 60 or more days following the test conducted to release them from isolation  
  (geographic separation)  and making them eligible to enter the Accredited herd. 
 
D. Artificial insemination— semen for artificial insemination in Accredited herds must be from sires in 
Accredited herds or from sires with a negative result on an official test for tuberculosis performed within 12 
months prior to the date of the semen collection.  
 
  
 
 
                   
Text Len: 1471
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 for artificial insemination in Accredited herds must be from sires in 
Accredited herds or from sires with a negative result on an official test for tuberculosis performed within 12 
months prior to the date of the semen collection.  
 
  
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     23
Part V—State or Zone Status 
 
 
 
A.  General provisions 
 
 1. Revocation or suspension of status—Di sclosure of tuberculosis in a State or zone and/or failure of a 
State or zone to take progressive steps to comply with these UM&R to seek out and eliminate bovine 
tuberculosis shall be cause for revocation or reduction of status. 
 
 2. A State or zone  may maintain status, as defined in 9 CFR, Section 77.5, if the State or zone complies 
with all of the procedures in these UM&R. 
 
 3. Tuberculosis must be compulsorily notifiable to State animal health authorities.  The State must have an
  infrastructure, laws, and regulations to make 
Text Len: 1061
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. A State or zone  may maintain status, as defined in 9 CFR, Section 77.5, if the State or zone complies 
with all of the procedures in these UM&R. 
 
 3. Tuberculosis must be compulsorily notifiable to State animal health authorities.  The State must have an
  infrastructure, laws, and regulations to make  the disease notifiable and to ensure compliance. 
 
 4. The State must have an effective veterinary organi zation and infrastructure.  A State must have the legal 
and financial resources to implement a tuberculosis eradication program and to ensure the compliance 
with program provisions. 
 
5. The State must supervise boundarie s through the use of road check stations, inspection of livestock  
at concentration points, or by any other means deemed appropriate by the Chief State Animal Health  
Official, the AVIC, the DTE, and the Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist.  The State must also maintain 
clinical and epidemiological surveillance and carry out necessary diagnostic tests. 
 
 6. Suspected and/or confirmed tuberculosis cases mu st be reported to State or Federal animal health 
officials within 24 hours or by the next business day.  
 
 7. If bovine tuberculosis is diagnosed within any State or  zone in an animal not specifically covered by this 
UM&R or the UM&R for captive cervids and a risk assessment conducted by APHIS determines that the 
outbreak poses a tuberculosis risk to livestock within the State or zone, the State must implement a 
tuberculosis management plan, approved jointly by the Chief State Animal Health Official and the APHIS 
Administrator, within 6 months of the diagnosis.  The management plan must include provisions for 
immediate investigation of bovine tuberculosis in animals held for exhibition and in livestock and
Text Len: 1780
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
outbreak poses a tuberculosis risk to livestock within the State or zone, the State must implement a 
tuberculosis management plan, approved jointly by the Chief State Animal Health Official and the APHIS 
Administrator, within 6 months of the diagnosis.  The management plan must include provisions for 
immediate investigation of bovine tuberculosis in animals held for exhibition and in livestock and wildlife; 
the prevention of the spread of the disease to other animals held for exhibition and to livestock and 
wildlife; increased surveillance for tuberculosis in livestock, wildlife, and animals held for exhibition; 
eradication of tuberculosis from individual herds; provisions to reduce the prevalence of tuberculosis in 
wildlife; and a realistic timeline for the eradication of tuberculosis.  
 
The plan must also include surveillance of free-ranging cervids at a rate to determine the annual 
prevalence of tuberculosis in the cervid population within an area or zone that is not classified as 
Accredited-free.  Feeding and baiting of free-ranging cervids should be banned in any county in which  
M. bovis infection has been disclosed in livestock or wildlife.  Performance standards, as appropriate, 
must be implemented to measure yearly progress toward eradication.  If a State or zone does not 
implement such a plan within the required 6 months, the State or zone could lose its current status and 
could be reclassified to the next lower status. 
 
 8. If any livestock other than cattle or bison are incl uded in a newly assembled herd on a premises where a 
tuberculosis-affected herd has been depopulated, the State or zone must apply the herd test 
requirements contained in these rules (Part III, K.2).  Failure to do so will result in reclassification of the 
State or zone to the next lower
Text Len: 1820
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 than cattle or bison are incl uded in a newly assembled herd on a premises where a 
tuberculosis-affected herd has been depopulated, the State or zone must apply the herd test 
requirements contained in these rules (Part III, K.2).  Failure to do so will result in reclassification of the 
State or zone to the next lower State or zone classification. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     24 
B.  Surveillance 
 
 1. Routine surveillance of cattle and bison in States or zones:   
 
  a. Surveillance of cattle and bison in each State or  zone consists of slaughter inspection and tuberculin 
testing.  In each State or zone the total number of adult cattle and bison tested and/or inspected at 
slaughter should be sufficient to detect a 0.05 percent, or lower, prevalence level among that State’s, 
or zone’s cattle and bison with 95 percent confidence.  For States or zones with more than 60,000 
Text Len: 1043
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
testing.  In each State or zone the total number of adult cattle and bison tested and/or inspected at 
slaughter should be sufficient to detect a 0.05 percent, or lower, prevalence level among that State’s, 
or zone’s cattle and bison with 95 percent confidence.  For States or zones with more than 60,000 
adult cattle and bison, this standard requires that at least 6,000 adult cattle and bison are 
documented to have been inspected at slaughter, or tuberculin tested, each year. 
 
  b .  Validation of slaughter inspection:  All cattle slaughtered in U.S. slaughter plants for wholesale or 
retail purposes are inspected for evidence of tuberculosis by State Meat Inspection or FSIS 
personnel.  To validate that carcasses are carefully inspected, each slaughter plant should submit 
suspicious granulomatous lesion(s) from at least one animal in every 2000 adult cattle or bison 
slaughtered at the facility.  The State and/or Federal animal health officials of a State or zone must 
assess the granuloma submission rates of slaughter plants within the borders of their State or zone.  
Failure of one or more plants within a State or zone to meet this granuloma submission rate may 
compromise the effectiveness of tuberculosis surveillance and could jeopardize the tuberculosis 
status of that State or zone, as well as other States or zones, that export cattle and bison to these 
plants for slaughter. 
 
c. Monitoring tuberculin testing:  Each State must implement a system to monitor the response rate 
reported by each individual authorized to conduct official tuberculin tests.  A response rate of less 
than one responder for each progressive specified range of CFT tests conducted as outlined in 
Appendix C
Text Len: 1725
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 bison to these 
plants for slaughter. 
 
c. Monitoring tuberculin testing:  Each State must implement a system to monitor the response rate 
reported by each individual authorized to conduct official tuberculin tests.  A response rate of less 
than one responder for each progressive specified range of CFT tests conducted as outlined in 
Appendix C, after 300 animals have been tested, must be addressed and appropriate action taken 
and documented. 
 
  d. Monitoring slaughter surveillance:  The Chief Stat e Animal Health Official and/or AVIC of each State  
   must develop and implement a plan that ensures  that each plant slaughtering cattle and/or bison 
within the State submits suspicious granulomatous lesions for laboratory examination at a rate of one 
or more for every 2000 adult animals slaughtered; provides estimates of the number and origin of the 
various classes of cattle and/or bison slaughtered and reports such estimates to the appropriate State 
or Federal animal health officials on at least a quarterly basis.  The plan should provide for a 
minimum of one visit per calendar quarter to each slaughter plant by State and/or Federal animal 
health officials.  The purpose of the periodic plant visits is to monitor surveillance activities for 
tuberculosis and other program diseases and to provide assistance to the attending meat inspection 
personnel and to plant management in resolving any surveillance issues that may arise. 
 
   In States where a significant number or all of the adult slaughter cattle and bison are exported for 
slaughter in plants located in other States, the Chief State Animal Health Official and/or AVIC must 
include in their slaughter surveillance plans provisions for determining where such cattle and bison 
are generally being shipped.  The plans should provide for surveying and monitoring the auction 
markets, commission firms
Text Len: 1894
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 significant number or all of the adult slaughter cattle and bison are exported for 
slaughter in plants located in other States, the Chief State Animal Health Official and/or AVIC must 
include in their slaughter surveillance plans provisions for determining where such cattle and bison 
are generally being shipped.  The plans should provide for surveying and monitoring the auction 
markets, commission firms, and dealers within the State that handle adult slaughter cattle and bison 
to determine where such animals are routinely shipped for slaughter.  The Federal and State animal 
health officials of the States exporting adult cattle and bison for slaughter should establish a working 
agreement with the Federal and State animal health officials of the States receiving such animals to 
ensure that the adult cattle and bison received and slaughtered from the exporting State are 
adequately monitored for bovine tuberculosis. 
 
2. Trace testing: 
 
  a. All cattle and bison in herds of origin and ca ttle and bison otherwise associated with those showing 
evidence of tuberculosis at time of slaughter must be quarantined and tested. 
 
  b. The testing schedule of all reactor and suspect herds must be current. 
 
                                                                                                                                             
Text Len: 1369
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                        25
  c. All cattle considered to be exposed to M. bovis must be traced, quarantined, and handled as outlined 
in Part III, K.3.  Epidemiologic investigation of cattle identified as exposed must be completed within 
90 days of initiation of the investigation unless the timelines are extended by the DTE with the 
concurrence of the Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
 
d. Epidemiologic investigation of positive bovi ne TB cases detected in slaughter cattle must be 
completed within 90 calendar days of laboratory notification of positive PCR or bacteriological 
isolation of M. bovis unless the timeframes are extended by the DTE with the concurrence of the 
Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
 
C. Annual and/or semiannual reporting 
 
1. Testing and slaughter surveillance—An annual repo rt, including a narrative, for each State or zone 
classified as Accredited-free or Modified Accredited Advanced, must be submitted, jointly, by the Chief 
State Animal Health Official and AVIC of each State or zone to VS between October 1 and November 30.  
Semiannual reports, including narratives, for each State or zone classified as Modified Accredited or 
Accreditation Preparatory, must be submitted, jointly, by the Chief State Animal Health Official and the 
AVIC
Text Len: 1376
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 must be submitted, jointly, by the Chief 
State Animal Health Official and AVIC of each State or zone to VS between October 1 and November 30.  
Semiannual reports, including narratives, for each State or zone classified as Modified Accredited or 
Accreditation Preparatory, must be submitted, jointly, by the Chief State Animal Health Official and the 
AVIC of each State or zone to VS between April 1 and May 31 and between October 1 and November 30.  
Each report must show the amount of testing and slaughter surveillance that has been conducted.  Such 
surveillance must be in conformance with Part V, B. of this UM&R.   
 
 2. Approval and maintenance of status for States or zones classified as Accredited-free or Modified 
Accredited Advanced requires a review and the approval of each annual report by the Administrator of 
APHIS.  Approval and maintenance of status for States or zones classified as Modified Accredited or 
Accreditation Preparatory requires a review of each semiannual report and the approval of each 
semiannual report by the Administrator of APHIS. 
 
D. Specific State or zone status plans 
 
 1. Accredited-free State or zone  
 
  a. Accredited-free States or zones have a herd prev alence of zero for bovine tuberculosis in cattle and 
bison. 
 
  b. If an outbreak of bovine tuberculosis is detected in a State or zone classified as Accredited-free, and 
the index herd is depopulated and an epidemiologic investigation is completed within 90 days of 
confirmation of infection in the index herd, and the depopulation(s) and the epidemiologic 
investigation(s) of affected herds subsequently identified that are associated with the index herd
Text Len: 1678
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 tuberculosis is detected in a State or zone classified as Accredited-free, and 
the index herd is depopulated and an epidemiologic investigation is completed within 90 days of 
confirmation of infection in the index herd, and the depopulation(s) and the epidemiologic 
investigation(s) of affected herds subsequently identified that are associated with the index herd are 
completed within an additional 120 days, and there is no evidence of the further spread of 
tuberculosis within the State or zone, then the State or zone may retain its Accredited-free status.  
The APHIS Administrator may extend the time limits to complete the depopulation and epidemiologic 
investigation of the index bovine tuberculosis-affected herd and/or the depopulation(s) and 
epidemiologic investigation(s) of affected herd(s) epidemiologically related to the index herd in 
specific cases where circumstances warrant such an extension. 
 
  c. If two or more affected herds are detected in an Accredited-free State or zone within a 48-month period,  
   the State or zone will be removed from the list of Accredited-free States or zones and will be reclassified  
   as Modified Accredited Advanced. 
 
 2. Modified Accredited Advanced State or zone  
 
  a. Modified Accredited Ad vanced States or zones must have had a bovine tuberculosis prevalence of 
less than 0.01 percent of the total number of cattle and bison herds in the State or zone for each of 
the most recent 2 years.  Except that:  The Administrator, upon review, may allow a State or zone 
with fewer than 30,000 herds to have up to 3 affected herds for each of the most recent 2 years, 
depending on
Text Len: 1654
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
less than 0.01 percent of the total number of cattle and bison herds in the State or zone for each of 
the most recent 2 years.  Except that:  The Administrator, upon review, may allow a State or zone 
with fewer than 30,000 herds to have up to 3 affected herds for each of the most recent 2 years, 
depending on the veterinary infrastructure, livestock demographics, and tuberculosis control and 
eradication measures in the State or zone. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     26 
 
 
  b. To qualify for Accredited-free status, a Modified Accredited Advanced State or zone must 
demonstrate to the Administrator that it complies with the provisions of these UM&R, has zero 
percent prevalence of affected cattle and bison herds, and has had no findings of tuberculosis in any 
cattle or bison in the State or zone for the previous 5 years.  Except that:   
 
   (1) The requirement of freedom from tuberculosis is 2 years from the release from quarantine of the 
last affected herd in States or zones
Text Len: 1135
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 zero 
percent prevalence of affected cattle and bison herds, and has had no findings of tuberculosis in any 
cattle or bison in the State or zone for the previous 5 years.  Except that:   
 
   (1) The requirement of freedom from tuberculosis is 2 years from the release from quarantine of the 
last affected herd in States or zones that were previously Accredited-free.  The State or zone 
must have conducted additional surveillance that demonstrates that other livestock herds and 
wildlife are not at risk of being infected with tuberculosis as determined by the Administrator 
based on a risk assessment conducted by APHIS.   
 
   (2) The requirement of freedom from tuberculosis can be less than 5 years in all other States or 
zones if the management of tuberculosis, including surveillance measures conducted in livestock 
and wildlife, exceeds the provisions of this UM&R as determined by APHIS and approved by the 
Administrator. 
 
 3. Modified Accredited State or zone  
 
  a. Modified Accredited States or zones must have had a tuberculosis prevalence of less than 0.1 
percent of the total number of cattle and bison herds in the State or zone for the most recent year.  
Except that:  The Administrator, upon review, may allow a State or zone with fewer than 10,000 herds 
to have up to 10 affected herds for the most recent year, depending on the veterinary infrastructure, 
livestock demographics, and tuberculosis control and eradication measures in the State or zone. 
 
  b. To qualify for Modified Accredited Advanced status, a Modified Accredited State or zone must 
demonstrate to the Administrator that it complies with the provisions of these UM&R and has had a 
tuberculosis prevalence of less than 0.01 percent of
Text Len: 1743
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

livestock demographics, and tuberculosis control and eradication measures in the State or zone. 
 
  b. To qualify for Modified Accredited Advanced status, a Modified Accredited State or zone must 
demonstrate to the Administrator that it complies with the provisions of these UM&R and has had a 
tuberculosis prevalence of less than 0.01 percent of the total number of cattle and bison herds in the 
State or zone for each of the most recent 2 years.  Except that:  The Administrator, upon review, may 
allow a State or zone with fewer than 30,000 herds to have up to 3 affected herds for each of the 
most recent 2 years, depending on the veterinary infrastructure, livestock demographics, and 
tuberculosis control and eradication measures in the State or zone. 
 
 4. Accreditation Preparatory State or zone  
 
  a. Accreditation Preparatory States or zones have a tuberculosis prevalence of less than 0.5 percent of 
the total number of cattle and bison herds in the State or zone. 
 
  b. To qualify for Modified Accredited status, an Accreditation Preparatory State or zone must 
demonstrate to the Administrator that it complies with the provisions of these UM&R and has had a 
tuberculosis prevalence of less than 0.1 percent of the total number of cattle and bison herds in the 
State or zone for the most recent year.  Except that:  the Administrator, upon review, may allow a 
State or zone with fewer than 10,000 herds to have up to 10 affected herds for the most recent year, 
depending on the veterinary infrastructure, livestock demographics, and tuberculosis control and 
eradication measures in the State or zone. 
 
 5. Nonaccredited State or zone  
 
  a
Text Len: 1676
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 the Administrator, upon review, may allow a 
State or zone with fewer than 10,000 herds to have up to 10 affected herds for the most recent year, 
depending on the veterinary infrastructure, livestock demographics, and tuberculosis control and 
eradication measures in the State or zone. 
 
 5. Nonaccredited State or zone  
 
  a. Nonaccredited States or zones have an unk nown tuberculosis-affected herd prevalence or a 
tuberculosis herd prevalence of 0.5 percent or greater. 
 
  b. To qualify for Accreditation Preparatory st atus, the State or zone must demonstrate to the 
   Administrator that it complies with the provisio ns of these UM&R and has a tuberculosis-affected herd 
   prevalence of less than 0.5 percent of the total number of cattle and bison herds in the State or zone. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     27
APPENDIX A  
 
TUBERCULOSIS TEST REQUIREMENTS FOR VARIOUS CLASSES OF CATTLE AND BISON NOT
Text Len: 1057
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               27
APPENDIX A  
 
TUBERCULOSIS TEST REQUIREMENTS FOR VARIOUS CLASSES OF CATTLE AND BISON NOT KNOWN  
TO BE AFFECTED WITH OR EXPOSED TO TUBERCULOSIS AND FROM NON-ACCREDITED HERDS,  
OTHER THAN COMMUTER HERDS, BEING MOVED INTERSTATE OR INTERZONE 
FOR BREEDING OR FEEDING PURPOSES 
 
Status of State or Zone Breeding Animals Sexually Intact Heifers for 
Feeding 
Steers and Spayed Heifers 
for Feeding 
 
Accredited Free 
 
No test required. 
 
No test required. 
 
No test required. 
Modified Accredited 
Advanced 
Negative test within 60 days of 
movement of all animals 18 
months of age and older that 
are included in the movement, 
or a negative test within 6 
months of the movement if 
such animals were included on 
a negative test of the herd of 
origin conducted within 6 
months of the movement. 
No test required if moved 
directly to an approved 
feedlot, or are moved 
through one approved 
livestock facility and then 
directly to an approved 
feedlot. 
No test required. 
Modified Accredited Negative test of the herd of 
origin (all animals 12 months 
of age and older) within 1 year 
of movement plus a negative 
test on the individual
Text Len: 1198
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
feedlot, or are moved 
through one approved 
livestock facility and then 
directly to an approved 
feedlot. 
No test required. 
Modified Accredited Negative test of the herd of 
origin (all animals 12 months 
of age and older) within 1 year 
of movement plus a negative 
test on the individual animals 
to be moved that are 2 months 
of age and older within 60 
days of the movement except 
that:  the second test is not 
required if the animals to be 
moved that are 2 months of 
age and older are moved 
within 60 days following the 
herd of origin herd test and 
were included on the herd of 
origin herd test. 
Negative test of all animals 
included in the movement 
that are 2 months of age and 
older within 60 days of the 
movement directly to an 
approved feedlot, or through 
one approved livestock 
facility and then directly to an 
approved feedlot. 
Negative test within 60 days 
of movement of all animals 
included in the movement 
that are 2 months of age and 
older. 
Accreditation Preparatory Movement for breeding 
purposes not permitted unless 
from an accredited herd.  (See 
Appendix B.)   
Negative test of the herd of 
origin (to include all animals 
regardless of age) within 1 
year of movement and an 
additional negative test on 
the individual animals to be 
moved within 60 days of the 
movement except that:  the 
additional test is not required 
if the animals are moved 
within 60 days of the herd of 
origin herd test and
Text Len: 1454
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 all animals 
regardless of age) within 1 
year of movement and an 
additional negative test on 
the individual animals to be 
moved within 60 days of the 
movement except that:  the 
additional test is not required 
if the animals are moved 
within 60 days of the herd of 
origin herd test and were 
included on the herd of origin 
herd test. 
 
Movement must be directly to 
an approved feedlot, or 
through one approved 
livestock facility and then 
directly to an approved 
feedlot. 
Negative test of the herd of 
origin (to include all animals 
regardless of age) within 1 
year of movement and an 
additional negative test on 
the individual animals to be 
moved within 60 days of the 
movement except that:  the 
additional test is not required 
if the animals are moved 
within 60 days of the herd of 
origin herd test and were 
included on the herd of origin 
herd test. 
Non-Accredited Movement for breeding 
purposes prohibited. 
Movement for feeding 
purposes prohibited. 
Movement for feeding 
purposes prohibited. 
 
                                                                                                           
Text Len: 1138
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                                          28 
APPENDIX B 
 
TUBERCULOSIS TEST REQUIREMENTS FOR VARIOUS CLASSES OF CATTLE AND BISON  
FROM ACCREDITED HERDS BEING MOVED INTERSTATE OR INTERZONE  
FOR BREEDING OR FEEDING PURPOSES 
 
 
Status of State or Zone Breeding Animals Sexually Intact Heifers 
for Feeding 
Steers and Spayed 
Heifers for Feeding 
 
Accredited-Free 
 
No test required. 
 
No test required. 
 
No test required. 
Modified Accredited 
Advanced 
No test required if 
accompanied by a 
certificate stating the 
accredited herd 
completed the testing 
necessary for 
accreditation with 
negative results within 2 
years of movement. 
Requirements the same 
as for breeding animals. 
Requirements the same 
as for breeding animals. 
Modified Accredited No test required if 
accompanied by a 
certificate stating the 
accredited herd 
completed the testing 
necessary for 
accreditation with
Text Len: 1000
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
accreditation with 
negative results within 2 
years of movement. 
Requirements the same 
as for breeding animals. 
Requirements the same 
as for breeding animals. 
Modified Accredited No test required if 
accompanied by a 
certificate stating the 
accredited herd 
completed the testing 
necessary for 
accreditation with 
negative results within 1 
year of movement. 
Requirements the same 
as for breeding animals. 
Requirements the same 
as for breeding animals. 
Accreditation 
Preparatory 
Negative test within 60 
days of movement and 
certificate stating 
accredited herd 
completed the testing 
necessary for 
accreditation with 
negative results within 1 
year of movement. 
Requirements the same 
as for breeding animals. 
Requirements the same 
as for breeding animals. 
Non-Accredited Movement for breeding 
purposes prohibited. 
Movement for feeding 
purposes prohibited. 
Movement for feeding 
purposes prohibited. 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                          
Text Len: 1091
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                           29
APPENDIX C 
 
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR CAUDAL FOLD TUBERCULIN TESTING 
 
Each individual authorized to conduct official CFT tests shall be in compliance with these standards for CFT 
testing if the number of CFT test responders reported is equal to, or greater than, the minimum number of CFT 
test responders expected for the specified maximum number of CFT tests conducted.  For example, if 5 
responders have been reported, then the total number of CFT tests conducted should be less than, or equal to, 
1050. 
 
The response rates of each individual authorized to conduct official CFT tests shall be calculated for the number 
of cattle or bison tested for each 1-year period.  Except that:  In the case of authorized individuals who test 300 or 
less cattle and bison in 1 year, the minimum response rates for the maximum number of CFT tests conducted 
shall be calculated on a cumulative basis from year to year. 
 
 
 
Number of CFT Tests 
 
Number of CFT Tests 
From Through 
Expected Minimum 
Number of CFT Test 
Responders  from through 
Expected Minimum 
Number of CFT Test 
Responders 
     0   300    0   3518 3634 26 
  301
Text Len: 1232
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of CFT Tests 
 
Number of CFT Tests 
From Through 
Expected Minimum 
Number of CFT Test 
Responders  from through 
Expected Minimum 
Number of CFT Test 
Responders 
     0   300    0   3518 3634 26 
  301   473    1 3635 3750 27 
  474   630     2 3751 3866 28 
  631   775     3 3867 3981 29 
  776   915     4 3982 4095 30 
  916 1050     5 4096 4209 31 
1051 1183     6 4210 4323 32 
1184 1315     7 4324 4437 33 
1316 1444    8 4438 4551 34 
1445 1570    9 4552 4665 35 
1571 1695   10 4666 4779 36 
1696 1820   11 4780 4893 37 
1821 1945   12 4894 5007 38 
1946 2070   13 5008 5121 39 
2071 2195   14 5122 5235 40 
2196 2320   15 5236 5349 41 
2321 2445   16 5350 5463 42 
2446 2570   17 5464 5577 43 
2571 2690   18 5578 5690 44 
2691 2810   19 5691 5802 45 
2811 2930   20 5803 5914 46 
2931 3048   21 5915 6026 47 
3049 3166
Text Len: 839
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
50 5463 42 
2446 2570   17 5464 5577 43 
2571 2690   18 5578 5690 44 
2691 2810   19 5691 5802 45 
2811 2930   20 5803 5914 46 
2931 3048   21 5915 6026 47 
3049 3166   22 6027 6138 48 
3167 3283   23 6139 6250 49 
3284 3400   24 6251 6362 50 
3401 3517   25 * * * 
 
The table above is constructed by assuming that at least 1 percent of non-affected cattle will be false positive on 
the CFT test.  For a given number of responders, the maximum allowable tests are calculated using the 
cumulative binomial distribution and determining the 5th percentile.  For example, 5 or fewer positive test results 
are expected to occur among less than 5 percent of Accredited Veterinarians who each test, 1050 head of cattle. 
 
*  To remain in compliance with these standards, if more than 6,362 CFT tests are conducted prior to the end of 1 
year, a minimum of 1 responder must be reported for each additional 110 CFT tests conducted during the 
remainder of the year. 
 
Text Len: 964
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
Bovine Tuberculosis 
Eradication 
 
Uniform Methods and Rules, 
Effective January 1, 2005 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
United States 
Department of 
Agriculture 
 
Animal and  
Plant Health 
Inspection 
Service 
 
APHIS 91-45-011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs 
and activities on the basis of race, color national origin, gender, religion, age, disability, 
political beliefs, sexual orientation, or marital or family status.  (Not all prohibited bases 
apply to all programs.)  Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for 
communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should 
contact USDA’ s TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
 
To files a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 
Room 326 W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 
20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice and TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
 
 
Issued December 2004 
 
                    
Text Len: 1139
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 
20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice and TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 
 
 
Issued December 2004 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     i
Contents 
 
 
                                                                                                                       Page  
Introduction                                            
Text Len: 548
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                Page  
Introduction                                                                                                                1 
 
Part I–Definitions    2 
 Accredited herd 2 
 Accredited Veterinarian 2 
 Affected herd 2 
 Anniversary date    2 
 Approved feedlot/approved pens    2 
 Approved laboratory    3 
 Approved livestock facility    3 
 Approved slaughtering establishment    3 
 Area Veterinarian in Charge (AVIC)    3 
 Auction    3 
 Bison    3 
 Bovine interferon gamma assay    3 
 Bovine tuberculosis    3 
 Cattle    3 
 Caudal fold tuberculin (CFT) test    3 
 Certificate    3 
 Cervical tuberculin (CT) test    4 
 Commission firm    4 
 Commission sales    4 
 Commuter herd    4 
 Comparative cervical tuberculin (CCT) test    4 
 Dealer    4 
 Designated Accredited Veterinarian    4 

Text Len: 845
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 Cervical tuberculin (CT) test    4 
 Commission firm    4 
 Commission sales    4 
 Commuter herd    4 
 Comparative cervical tuberculin (CCT) test    4 
 Dealer    4 
 Designated Accredited Veterinarian    4 
 Designated Tuberculosis Epidemiologist (DTE)    4 
 Direct shipment to slaughter    5 
            Epidemiology                                                                                                      5 
 Eradication    5 
 Exotic hoofstock    5 
 Exposed animals    5 
 Feedlot    5 
 Geographic separation    5 
 Herd    5 
 Herd depopulation    6 
 Herd of origin    6 
 Herd test    6 
 Individual herd plan    6 
 Listed establishment    6 
 Livestock    6 
            Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)    6 
 Natural additions    6 
 Negative animals    6 
 No gross lesion (NGL)    7 
 Official eartag    7 
 Official
Text Len: 851
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   6 
 Livestock    6 
            Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)    6 
 Natural additions    6 
 Negative animals    6 
 No gross lesion (NGL)    7 
 Official eartag    7 
 Official identification/officially identified    7 
 Official tuberculosis test    7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     ii
 Parallel testing    7 
 Permit    7 
 Premises identification number    7 
 Program herd    7 
 Reactor    7 
 Responder    7 
 Routine testing    8 
 Split status State    8 
 State or zone status    8 
 Suspect    8 
 Test eligible cattle or bison (Herd Accreditation/Reaccreditation Test)    8 
 Test eligible cattle or bison (for movement)    8 
 Test eligible cattle or bison (
Text Len: 816
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 testing    8 
 Split status State    8 
 State or zone status    8 
 Suspect    8 
 Test eligible cattle or bison (Herd Accreditation/Reaccreditation Test)    8 
 Test eligible cattle or bison (for movement)    8 
 Test eligible cattle or bison (Program Herds)    8 
 Tuberculin    9 
 Zone    9 
 
Part II – General Procedures (Minimum Requirements)                                         10 
A. Authority to implement and administer tuberculosis program control and  10 
      eradication measures 
B.   Personnel authorized to apply official tuberculosis tests  10 
C.  Approved laboratories  10 
D. Presumptive diagnostic test  10 
E.   Supplemental diagnostic tests and procedures  10 
F. Primary diagnostic test  10 
G. Tuberculin test interpretation  11 
H. Cleaning and disinfection of premises, conveyances, and materials  11 
I.    Determination of the State-of-origin of infected animals  11 
J.   Identification  11 
K.   Dealer Registration and Recordkeeping  11 
 
Part III–Standard Procedures (Minimum Requirements)  13 
A.   Classification of cattle and bison tested  13 
B.   Reporting of tests  13 
C.  Disposition of tuberculin-responding cattle and bison  14 
D.   Interstate or interzone movement requirements for tuberculosis (cattle or  14 
 b
Text Len: 1268
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part III–Standard Procedures (Minimum Requirements)  13 
A.   Classification of cattle and bison tested  13 
B.   Reporting of tests  13 
C.  Disposition of tuberculin-responding cattle and bison  14 
D.   Interstate or interzone movement requirements for tuberculosis (cattle or  14 
 bison not known to be affected with or exposed to tuberculosis)    
E.   Procedures in tuberculosis-affected herds  16 
F.   Procedures in tuberculosis-affected feedlots   16 
G.   International movement requirements for tuberculosis (cattle or bison not  16 
      known to be affected with or exposed to tuberculosis)    
H.   Identification of reactor cattle and bison  16 
I.    Identification of exposed cattle, bison, and other livestock  17 
J.   Quarantine procedures  17 
K.   Retest schedules for high-risk herds  18 
L.   Surveillance around an M. bovis affected herd where wildlife are known to  19 
      be affected 
 
Part IV–Accredited Herd Plan for Cattle or Bison   20 
A.   Animals to be tested   20 
B.   Accreditation and reaccreditation   20 
C.  Additions   21 
D.  Artificial insemination   22 
 
                                                                 
Text Len: 1172
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

D.  Artificial insemination   22 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     iii
Part V–State or Zone Status   23 
A.   General provisions   23 
B.   Surveillance   24 
C.   Annual and/or semiannual reporting   25 
D.   Specific State or zone status plans   25 
 
Appendix A   27 
Tuberculosis Test Requirements for Various Classes of Cattle and Bison Not    
Known to be Affected with or Exposed to Tuberculosis and from Non-Accredited  
Herds, Other than Commuter Herds, Being Moved Interstate or Interzone for  
Breeding or Feeding Purposes 
 
Appendix B   28 
Tuberculosis Test Requirements for Various Classes of Cattle and Bison from    
Accredited Herds Being Moved Interstate or Interzone for Breeding or Feeding  
Purposes 
 
Appendix C   29 
Performance Standards for Caudal Fold Tu
Text Len: 917
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
eding or Feeding Purposes 
 
Appendix B   28 
Tuberculosis Test Requirements for Various Classes of Cattle and Bison from    
Accredited Herds Being Moved Interstate or Interzone for Breeding or Feeding  
Purposes 
 
Appendix C   29 
Performance Standards for Caudal Fold Tuberculin Testing    
 
  iv 
Summary of Changes 
 
July 20, 2005 
Page 28, Appendix C: Corrected explanatory notes below table.   
 
January 10, 2006 
Page 24, Part V, D, 1, c:  Amended requirements for downgrading from Accredited-free to Modified Accredited 
Advanced. 
 
March 14, 2006 
Page 5, Definitions: Revised definition of “herd” 
 
Page 6, Definitions: Revised definition of “herd test” 
 
Page 16, Part III, F: Amended instructions for handling tuberculosis-affected feedlots 
 
Page 25, Part V, B, 2, d: Added requirement for completing investigations of slaughter cases within 90 days. 
 
                                                                                                                                         
Text Len: 1013
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                            1
Introduction 
 
 
 These Uniform Methods and Rules (UM&R) are the minimum standards 
adopted and approved by the Deputy Administrator, Veterinary Services (VS), 
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), on January 20, 2005.  
They were established for the maintenance of tuberculosis-free accredited 
herds of cattle and bison and the maintenance of State or zone status in the 
U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) tuberculosis eradication program. 
 
 These minimum standards do not preclude the adoption of more stringent 
standards by any State or zone.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                
Text Len: 838
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                     2 
                              Part I – Definitions 
 
 
 
Accredited herd A herd that has passed at least two consec utive official tuberculosis tests of all 
eligible animals conducted at 9-15 month intervals, has no evidence of, or 
exposure potential to, bovine tuberculosis and meets the standards of these 
Uniform Methods and Rules (UM&R).  Accredited herd status is maintained 
through annual herd testing in Accreditation Preparatory and Modified Accredited 
States or zones, and through biennial herd testing in Modified Accredited 
Advanced and Accredited-free States or zones during a period of 3 months prior to 
the anniversary date to 3 months following the anniversary date.  However, if the 
reaccreditation test is conducted following the anniversary date, the Accredited 
status of the herd will be suspended until the reaccreditation test is completed.  
The testing interval for maintaining Accredited herd status in States having more 
than one status [split status zone(s)] shall be the same for the whole State and 
shall be that of the lowest status of any zone within the State.  The Designated 
Tuberculosis Epidemiologist (DTE) and Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist must 
certify in
Text Len: 1316
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
The testing interval for maintaining Accredited herd status in States having more 
than one status [split status zone(s)] shall be the same for the whole State and 
shall be that of the lowest status of any zone within the State.  The Designated 
Tuberculosis Epidemiologist (DTE) and Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist must 
certify in writing to the Accredited status of herds in States or zones with wildlife 
reservoirs of tuberculosis and in States or zones with lower than Modified 
Accredited Advanced status. 
 
Accredited A veterinarian approved by the Administrator of APHIS, to perform functions 
Veterinarian required by cooperative State-Federal animal disease control and eradication                           
programs. 
 
Affected herd A herd of livestock in which there is  strong and substantial evidence that 
Mycobacterium bovis exists.  This evidence should include, but is not limited to, 
any of the following:  histopathology, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay, 
bacterial isolation or detection, testing data, or epidemiologic evidence such as 
contact with known sources of infection. 
 
Anniversary date The test observation  date (month/day) of the second consecutive test in cattle 
and/or bison with no evidence of tuberculosis disclosed (that is, the test on which 
the herd was recognized as accredited, or the accrediting test).  Following the 
initial accreditation of a herd, the herd must be tested annually if located in an 
Accreditation Preparatory or Modified Accredited State or zone, or biennially if 
located in a Modified Accredited Advanced or Accredited-free State or
Text Len: 1621
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 is, the test on which 
the herd was recognized as accredited, or the accrediting test).  Following the 
initial accreditation of a herd, the herd must be tested annually if located in an 
Accreditation Preparatory or Modified Accredited State or zone, or biennially if 
located in a Modified Accredited Advanced or Accredited-free State or zone to 
maintain Accredited status.  The testing interval for reaccrediting herds in States 
having more than one status [split status zone(s)] will be the same for the whole 
State and will be that of the lowest status of any zone within the State.  
Reaccreditation tests must be conducted between 9 and 15 months from the 
anniversary date (month/day) established on the accrediting test in herds located in 
Accreditation Preparatory or Modified Accredited States or zones.  Reaccreditation 
tests must be conducted between 21 and 27 months from the anniversary date 
(month/day) established on the accrediting test in herds located in Modified 
Accredited Advanced or Accredited Free States or zones.  
 
Approved feedlot/ A confined area, either the entire feedlot or designated pens within the feedlot, 
approved pens approved jointly by the Chief State Animal Health Official and the APHIS 
Administrator for feeding restricted cattle or bison.  Any provisions for grazing or 
pasturing restricted cattle or bison entering an approved feedlot/approved pens 
must be formalized in a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) by the Chief State 
Animal Health Official and the Administrator.  The MOU must include adequate 
isolation and fencing requirements as recommended by the DTE and the Regional 
Tuberculosis Epidemiologist.  An animal leaving the confined area must be 
destined to either
Text Len: 1736
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 feedlot/approved pens 
must be formalized in a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) by the Chief State 
Animal Health Official and the Administrator.  The MOU must include adequate 
isolation and fencing requirements as recommended by the DTE and the Regional 
Tuberculosis Epidemiologist.  An animal leaving the confined area must be 
destined to either another approved feedlot or approved pen, or to an approved 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     3
slaughtering establishment.  The operator of the feedlot must follow approved 
procedures to account for animals entering or leaving the confined area.  The Chief 
State Animal Health Official and the Area Veterinarian in Charge (AVIC) of each 
State must provide the Veterinary Services (VS) National Center for Animal Health 
Programs a list of approved feedlots and/or approved pens within his/her State.  
The VS staff must be notified of any additions to the list or any deletions from the 
list. 
   
Approved laboratory A State, Federal , or National Animal Health Laboratory Network
Text Len: 1173
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 provide the Veterinary Services (VS) National Center for Animal Health 
Programs a list of approved feedlots and/or approved pens within his/her State.  
The VS staff must be notified of any additions to the list or any deletions from the 
list. 
   
Approved laboratory A State, Federal , or National Animal Health Laboratory Network (NAHLN) 
veterinary laboratory specifically recognized by APHIS to conduct official 
tuberculosis program diagnostic testing.  The primary laboratory for tuberculosis 
histopathological examination and bacteriological culture shall be the National 
Veterinary Services Laboratories (NVSL), Ames, Iowa.  Food Safety and 
Inspection Service (FSIS) field service laboratories may be utilized for 
histopathology. 
 
Approved livestock A stockyard, livestock market, buying station, concentration point, or any other  
facility premises under State or Federal veterinary supervision where livestock are 
assembled and that has been approved under Title 9, Code of Federal Regulations 
(9 CFR), Section 71.20. 
 
Approved slaughtering A slaughtering establishment operating under the provisions of the Federal 
establishment Meat Inspection Act (21 U.S.C. 601 et seq.), or a State-inspected slaughtering 
establishment that has inspection by a State inspector at the time of slaughter. 
 
Area Veterinarian in The veterinary official of APHIS, VS who is assigned by the VS Deputy 
Charge (AVIC) Administrator to supervise and perform the official animal health activities of APHIS 
in the State concerned. 
 
Auction A public sale of livestock to the highest bidder. 
 
Bison Bovids (genus Bison) commonly referred to as American buffalo or buffalo. 
 
Bovine interfer
Text Len: 1699
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 VS Deputy 
Charge (AVIC) Administrator to supervise and perform the official animal health activities of APHIS 
in the State concerned. 
 
Auction A public sale of livestock to the highest bidder. 
 
Bison Bovids (genus Bison) commonly referred to as American buffalo or buffalo. 
 
Bovine interferon An official supplemental diagnostic test that, if approved by the Chief State Animal  
gamma assay                   Health Official and the AVIC  within the State, may be used in cattle herds under 
the direction of the DTE and with the concurrence of the Regional Tuberculosis 
Epidemiologist.  The bovine interferon gamma assay should only be conducted on 
blood samples collected between 3 and 30 days after injection of bovine tuberculin 
for the caudal fold tuberculin (CFT) test. 
 
Bovine tuberculosis A chronic, granulomatous di sease caused primarily by Mycobacterium bovis, a 
very slow growing, acid-fast, Gram-positive, rod to filamentous shaped bacteria.  
M. bovis has a very broad host range and can infect all warm-blooded vertebrates, 
including humans. 
 
Cattle All domestic bovine (genus Bos) animals of all ages. 
 
Caudal fold tuberculin The intradermal injection of 0.1ml of  USDA bovine purified protein derivative 
(CFT) test (PPD) tuberculin (1 mg/ml PPD) into either side of the caudal fold with reading by 
visual observation and palpation 72 hours (plus or minus 6 hours) following 
in
Text Len: 1417
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Caudal fold tuberculin The intradermal injection of 0.1ml of  USDA bovine purified protein derivative 
(CFT) test (PPD) tuberculin (1 mg/ml PPD) into either side of the caudal fold with reading by 
visual observation and palpation 72 hours (plus or minus 6 hours) following 
injection.   
 
Certificate An official document issued by an APHIS representative, a State representative, or 
an Accredited Veterinarian at the point of origin of a shipment of livestock to be 
moved interstate that includes the official identification of each animal to be moved; 
the number, breed, sex, and approximate age of the animals covered by the 
document; the purpose for which the animals are to be moved; the date and place  
 
                                                                                                                                                                     4 
 of issuance; the points of origin and destination; the consignor and the consignee; 
and which states that the animal or animals identified on the certificate meet the 
requirements for interstate movement. 
 

Text Len: 1097
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                              4 
 of issuance; the points of origin and destination; the consignor and the consignee; 
and which states that the animal or animals identified on the certificate meet the 
requirements for interstate movement. 
 
Cervical tuberculin The intradermal injection of 0.1 ml of USDA bovine cervical PPD tuberculin 
(CT) test (2 mg/ml PPD) in the cervical region with reading by visual observation and 
palpation 72 hours (plus or minus 6 hours) following injection.   
 
Commission firm A person, partnership, or corporation that buys and sells livestock as a third party 
and reports details of the transaction to the seller, the buyer, or both.  This includes 
any such person or group regardless of whether a fee is charged for the services. 
 
Commission sales Sales that are conducted by a third party who reports details of the transactions to 
the seller, the buyer, or both. 
 
Commuter herd A herd that has been recognized and a pproved to have its animals moved 
interstate or interzone, without change of ownership, during the course of normal 
production operations.  The animals must move directly from property owned, 
leased, or rented by certain individual producers or entities directly to property 
owned, leased, or rented by these same individual producers or entities.  A 
commuter herd agreement specifying testing or certifications excepted or required, 
and agreed upon by State and Federal officials and the individual or entity for each 
State affected must be in place prior to any movements and must be reviewed and 
renewed annually to remain in effect. 
 
Comparative cervical
Text Len: 1631
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 or rented by these same individual producers or entities.  A 
commuter herd agreement specifying testing or certifications excepted or required, 
and agreed upon by State and Federal officials and the individual or entity for each 
State affected must be in place prior to any movements and must be reviewed and 
renewed annually to remain in effect. 
 
Comparative cervical The intradermal injection of bi ologically balanced USDA bovine PPD 
tuberculin (CCT) test tuberculin (0.1 ml)  and avian PPD tuberculin (0.1 ml) at separate sites in the 
midcervical area to determine the probable presence of bovine tuberculosis  
 (M. bovis) by comparing the responses to the two tuberculins at 72 hours (plus or 
minus 6 hours) following injection.  The CCT injection must occur either:  (1) within 
10 days following the CFT injection or (2) more than 60 days following the CFT 
injection.  This test shall be administered only by a State or Federal veterinarian 
specifically trained in the application of the test. 
 
Dealer All persons engaged in the business of buying or selling livestock in commerce 
either on their own account or as the employees or agents of the vendor, 
purchaser, or both, or all persons engaged in the business of buying or selling 
livestock in commerce on a commission basis.  The term shall not include persons 
who: (1) buy or sell livestock as part of their own bona fide breeding, feeding, or 
dairy or beef operations; (2) are not engaged in the business of buying, selling, 
trading, or negotiating the transfer of livestock; or (3) receive livestock exclusively 
for immediate slaughter on their
Text Len: 1630
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 basis.  The term shall not include persons 
who: (1) buy or sell livestock as part of their own bona fide breeding, feeding, or 
dairy or beef operations; (2) are not engaged in the business of buying, selling, 
trading, or negotiating the transfer of livestock; or (3) receive livestock exclusively 
for immediate slaughter on their own premises.   
 
Designated Accredited An Accredited Veterinarian trained and approved to conduct specific tuberculosis 
Veterinarian                            tests such as the bovine interferon gamma assay and/or other tuberculosis 
program activities. 
 
Designated A State or Federal epidemiologist designated in each State  by APHIS to make 
Tuberculosis decisions concerning the use and interpreta tion of diagnostic tests for tuberculosis 
Epidemiologist (DTE) and to manage the tuberculosis program.  The DTE must be selected jointly by the 
cooperating Chief State Animal Health Official, the AVIC, and the Regional 
Tuberculosis Epidemiologist.  The National Center for Animal Health Programs – 
Eradication and Surveillance Team Staff of VS must concur with the appointment. 
 
 The DTE has the responsibility to determine the scope of epidemiologic 
investigations, determine the status of herds, assist in development of individual 
 
                                                                                 
Text Len: 1367
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                                                                    5
herd plans, and coordinate disease surveillance and eradication programs within 
his or her geographic area of responsibility.  The DTE has authority to make  
 independent decisions concerning the use and interpretation of diagnostic tests 
and the management of herds when those decisions are supported by sound 
disease eradication principles. 
 
Direct shipment to The shipment of livestock from a premises, under permit and without unloading, 
slaughter directly to a slaughter establishment under State or Federal inspection and without 
diversion to assembly points, such as auctions, dealers, commission firm premises, 
public stockyards, or feedlots. 
 
Epidemiology A branch of medical science that deals wi th the incidence, distribution, and control 
of disease in the animal population. 
 
Eradication The complete elimination of bovine tubercu losis from livestock in a State or zone.  
 
Exotic hoofstock Hoofed livestock  other than cattle, bison, domestic sheep and goats, horses, 
mules, donkeys and swine that are not
Text Len: 1202
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
, and control 
of disease in the animal population. 
 
Eradication The complete elimination of bovine tubercu losis from livestock in a State or zone.  
 
Exotic hoofstock Hoofed livestock  other than cattle, bison, domestic sheep and goats, horses, 
mules, donkeys and swine that are not considered indigenous to a State or zone: 
(e.g. certain species of antelope such as addax, blesbok, kudu, nilgai, and oryx; 
certain species of cervids such as axis, sika, and fallow deer; certain species of 
sheep and goats such as aoudad, ibex, and markhor; and certain species of 
equine such as zebra.) 
 
Exposed animals Any livestock that have been exposed to  bovine tuberculosis by reason of 
associating with other livestock in which M. bovis has been diagnosed. 
 
Feedlot A confined drylot area for finish feeding of animals.  
 
Geographic separation A minimum of 30 feet of separation, no common or shared handling facilities or 
equipment, no common watering or feeding equipment, and no common feed 
vehicles that enter the premises of herds of different status.  Also, if herds of 
different status are fed by the same personnel, workers must wear different 
outerwear (e.g., boots and coveralls) when moving from a lower status herd to a 
higher status herd. 
  
Herd Except for livestock assembled at feedlots,  any group of livestock maintained for at 
least 4 months on common ground for any purpose, or two or more groups of 
livestock under common ownership or supervision that are geographically 
separated but that have
Text Len: 1533
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
alls) when moving from a lower status herd to a 
higher status herd. 
  
Herd Except for livestock assembled at feedlots,  any group of livestock maintained for at 
least 4 months on common ground for any purpose, or two or more groups of 
livestock under common ownership or supervision that are geographically 
separated but that have an interchange or movement of livestock without regard to 
health status, as determined by the Administrator. This definition shall include: 
 
1.   All livestock under common ownership or supervision that are grouped on one       
 or more parts of any single premises, farm, or ranch; or  
 
 2.  All livestock under common ownership or  supervision on two or more premises   
  that are geographically separated, but in which the animals have been  
  interchanged or had contact with animals  from different premises.  It will be
  assumed that contact between animals of the same species on the different
  premises has occurred unless the owne r establishes otherwise and the results
  of the epidemiologic investigation are consistent with the lack of contact
  between premises; or  
 
 3.   All livestock on common premises, such as community pastures or grazing 
association units, but owned by different persons.  Other groups of animals 
owned or co-owned by the persons involved that are located on other premises 
are considered to be part of a herd unless the epidemiologic investigation 
 
                                                                     
Text Len: 1512
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 herd unless the epidemiologic investigation 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     6 
establishes that animals from an affected herd have not had the opportunity for 
direct or indirect contact with animals from that specific premises. 
 
Herd depopulation The destruction, by slaughter or by death otherwise, of all livestock in a herd that 
have been exposed to bovine tuberculosis.  Restocking of the affected premises 
shall not begin until the depopulation and the required cleaning and disinfection 
have been completed, and the premises has been vacant of all livestock for at 
least 30 days. 
 
Herd of origin A herd of one or more sires and dams and their offspring from which animals in a 
consignment presented for interstate or international movement originate.  The 
herd of origin may be the herd of birth or the herd where the animal has resided for 
a minimum 4-month period immediately prior to movement.  If the owner/manager 
of the herd has two or more groups of animals at different locations, and there is 
movement of animals between the groups,
Text Len: 1198
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ignment presented for interstate or international movement originate.  The 
herd of origin may be the herd of birth or the herd where the animal has resided for 
a minimum 4-month period immediately prior to movement.  If the owner/manager 
of the herd has two or more groups of animals at different locations, and there is 
movement of animals between the groups, then they are all considered to be one 
herd of origin.  Additional animals can be moved into a herd of origin during or after 
the 4-month qualifying period if the animals:  (1) originate from a tuberculosis 
accredited herd, or (2) originate from a herd that was negative on an official test for 
bovine tuberculosis conducted within the last 12 months and the individual cattle or 
bison being moved into the herd of origin are negative to any additional tests for 
tuberculosis required by the APHIS Administrator. 
 
Herd test An official tuberculosis test of all test elig ible cattle or bison in a herd as well as any 
other commingled or exposed livestock which may be part of that herd, as deemed 
necessary by the Designated Tuberculosis Epidemiologist or the Regional 
Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
 
Individual herd plan A written disease management plan that is designed by the herd owner(s) and/or 
their representative(s), and a State or Federal veterinarian to eradicate 
tuberculosis from an affected herd while reducing human exposure to the disease.  
The herd plan will include appropriate herd test frequencies, tests to be employed, 
and any additional disease management or herd management practices deemed 
necessary to eradicate tuberculosis from the herd in an efficient and effective 
manner.  The plan must be approved by the Chief State Animal Health Official and 
AVIC, and have the concurrence of
Text Len: 1792
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 human exposure to the disease.  
The herd plan will include appropriate herd test frequencies, tests to be employed, 
and any additional disease management or herd management practices deemed 
necessary to eradicate tuberculosis from the herd in an efficient and effective 
manner.  The plan must be approved by the Chief State Animal Health Official and 
AVIC, and have the concurrence of the DTE or Regional Tuberculosis 
Epidemiologist. 
 
Listed establishment             An establishment, such as a slaughter plant or a rendering plant, that operates 
under the provisions of Title 9, CFR, Part 71. 
 
Livestock Cattle, bison, cervids, swine, goats, and other hoofed animals including exotic 
hoofed animals, such as antelope, raised or maintained in captivity for any 
purpose.  The domestic species llama and alpaca are also included.  (Note:  
Exclusion of any livestock being evaluated, tested, or depopulated because of 
tuberculosis on any particular premises shall only be made with the concurrence of 
the DTE and Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist.) 
 
Memorandum of  A formal agreement between two or more entities that provides for conducting        
Understanding (MOU) certain activities under specifically defined conditions. 
 
Natural additions Animals born and raised in a herd. 
 
Negative animals Any cattle or bison that show no response to an official tuberculosis  test; are 
classified negative on the bovine interferon gamma assay if conducted; or are 
classified negative for tuberculosis by a State or VS veterinarian based upon 
history, supplemental tests, examination of the carcass, and histopathological 
examination and bacteriological culture
Text Len: 1683
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 
Negative animals Any cattle or bison that show no response to an official tuberculosis  test; are 
classified negative on the bovine interferon gamma assay if conducted; or are 
classified negative for tuberculosis by a State or VS veterinarian based upon 
history, supplemental tests, examination of the carcass, and histopathological 
examination and bacteriological culture of selected tissues. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     7
 
No gross Any animal that has no visible  lesion(s) of bovine tuberculosis detected upon 
lesion (NGL) necropsy or slaughter inspection.  (An animal with a skin lesion(s) alone will be 
considered in the same category as an NGL animal.) 
 
Official eartag An eartag approved by the APHIS Administ rator as providing unique identification 
for each individual bovine or bison by conforming to the alphanumeric National 
Eartagging System. 
 
Official identification/ The identification of livestock by means of an official eartag, registration tattoo, or 
offic
Text Len: 1132
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.) 
 
Official eartag An eartag approved by the APHIS Administ rator as providing unique identification 
for each individual bovine or bison by conforming to the alphanumeric National 
Eartagging System. 
 
Official identification/ The identification of livestock by means of an official eartag, registration tattoo, or 
officially identified brand, or any  other method approved by the Administrator of APHIS, that provides 
unique identification for each animal. 
 
Official tuberculosis A test for bovine tuberculosis, appr oved by APHIS, applied and reported by 
test authorized personnel (Part II, B.) in acco rdance with this UM&R.  The official 
tuberculosis tests for cattle and bison are the: 
 
•  Caudal fold tuberculin test 
•  Comparative cervical tuberculin test 
•  Cervical tuberculin test 
•  Bovine interferon gamma assay (cattle only) 
 
Parallel testing Two or more diagnostic test procedures applied to an animal or herd 
 simultaneously.  If one or more of the test procedures is positive, the animal or 
herd cannot be classified as negative. 
 
Permit An official document issued by a VS representative, a State representative, an 
Accredited Veterinarian, or a designated Accredited Veterinarian that is required to 
accompany any reactor, suspect, or exposed livestock to slaughter.  The permit will 
list: (1) the reactor tag number or official eartag number in the case of reactor, 
suspect, or exposed livestock; (2) the owner’s name and address; (3) origin and 
destination locations; (4) number of animals covered; and
Text Len: 1549
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 any reactor, suspect, or exposed livestock to slaughter.  The permit will 
list: (1) the reactor tag number or official eartag number in the case of reactor, 
suspect, or exposed livestock; (2) the owner’s name and address; (3) origin and 
destination locations; (4) number of animals covered; and (5) the purpose of the 
movement.  If a change in destination becomes necessary, a new permit must be 
issued by authorized personnel.  No diversion from the destination on the permit is 
allowed. 
 
Premises identification An APHIS-approved method of identific ation that includes the assignment of  
number a unique number or alpha-numeric number to a premises by State or Federal 
animal health officials and with such premises number or alpha-numeric number 
being applied to the individual animal(s) residing on, or being moved from the 
premises. 
 
Program herd Any herd of livestock known or suspecte d of being affected with, or exposed to,  
 M. bovis that is being evaluated by State and/or Federal animal health officials to 
determine its disease status. 
Reactor Any bovid (genus Bos) or bison that shows a response to an official tuberculosis 
test and is classified a reactor by the testing veterinarian or DTE, or any suspect 
animal that is classified a reactor by the DTE upon slaughter inspection or 
necropsy, histopathological examination, PCR assay, and/or culture of selected 
tissues collected by the Federal or State veterinarian performing or supervising the 
slaughter inspection or necropsy. 
Responder Any livestock officially skin tested for tuberculosis that has a  visible or palpable 
response at the site of tuberculin injection
Text Len: 1662
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
TE upon slaughter inspection or 
necropsy, histopathological examination, PCR assay, and/or culture of selected 
tissues collected by the Federal or State veterinarian performing or supervising the 
slaughter inspection or necropsy. 
Responder Any livestock officially skin tested for tuberculosis that has a  visible or palpable 
response at the site of tuberculin injection. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     8 
Routine testing CFT tests conducted as part of a State or zone  eradication or surveillance program 
in which the results of all tested animals are reported to the appropriate State 
and/or Federal animal health officials. 
Split status State A State designated by APHIS and State animal health officials as having two or 
more geographic areas with different bovine tuberculosis statuses.  Such a State 
must meet annual performance measures outlined in an MOU to maintain split 
status. 
 
State or zone status One of five categories for which a State or zone may qualify based on:  (1) the 
infrastructure existing in the State or zone for conducting a bovine
Text Len: 1210
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

more geographic areas with different bovine tuberculosis statuses.  Such a State 
must meet annual performance measures outlined in an MOU to maintain split 
status. 
 
State or zone status One of five categories for which a State or zone may qualify based on:  (1) the 
infrastructure existing in the State or zone for conducting a bovine tuberculosis  
eradication program; (2) the compliance with the provisions of this UM&R; and (3) 
the prevalence of infection in the State or zone.  The five categories are:  (1) 
Accredited-free State or zone; (2) Modified Accredited Advanced State or zone; (3) 
Modified Accredited State or zone; (4) Accreditation Preparatory State or zone; and 
(5) non-accredited State or zone. 
 
The requirements and standards for attaining and maintaining each of the five 
State or zone bovine tuberculosis eradication program status levels are provided in 
Part V of this UM&R. 
Suspect Any cattle or bison that show a response to the CFT test and are not classified as 
reactor, or any cattle or bison that have been classified as suspect by CCT tests; 
the bovine interferon gamma assay; or any other official test for tuberculosis.                            
 
Test eligible cattle                 1.   In Accredited-free States or zones:  all cattle or bison 24 months of  
or bison (Herd age (as evidenced by the central incisors being fully erupted and in wear) and 
Accreditation
Text Len: 1421
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     
 
Test eligible cattle                 1.   In Accredited-free States or zones:  all cattle or bison 24 months of  
or bison (Herd age (as evidenced by the central incisors being fully erupted and in wear) and 
Accreditation/ older. 
Reaccreditation Test) 
         2.   In Modified Accredited Advanced Stat es or zones:  all cattle or bison 18 
months of age (as evidenced by the loss of the central deciduous incisors) and 
older. 
 
                                                3.   In Modified Accredited States or zones:  all cattle or bison 12 months of age 
and older. 
 
                                             4.   In Accreditation Preparatory States or zones:  all cattle or bison regardless of 
age. 
    
Test eligible cattle 1. From Accredited-free States or  zones:  no test required.   
or bison (for movement)   
 2. From Modified Accredited Advanced States or zones:  all cattle and bison 18 
months of age (as evidenced by the loss of the central incisors) and older.  
(Note:  Applicable when a test for movement is required.  See Part III
Text Len: 1072
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  no test required.   
or bison (for movement)   
 2. From Modified Accredited Advanced States or zones:  all cattle and bison 18 
months of age (as evidenced by the loss of the central incisors) and older.  
(Note:  Applicable when a test for movement is required.  See Part III, D.2.d.) 
 
 3. From Modified Accredited States or zones:  all cattle and bison to be moved 
that are 2 months of age and older.  (Note:  Applicable when a test for 
movement is required.  See Part III, D.3.b. and Part III, D.3.d.) 
 
 4. From Accreditation Preparatory States or zones:  cattle and bison of all ages.  
(Note:  Applicable when a test for movement is required.  See Part III, D.4.b 
and Part III, D.4.c.) 
 
Test eligible cattle           In accordance with the individual herd plan or applicable eradication program 
or bison (Program                standards. 
Herds) 
 
                                                                                                                   
Text Len: 984
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                                  9
Tuberculin A product approved by USDA  and produced under USDA license for injection into 
livestock for the purpose of detecting bovine tuberculosis. 
Zone A defined geographical land area identifiabl e by geological, political, manmade, or 
surveyed boundaries with mechanisms of disease spread, epidemiological 
characteristics, and the ability to control the movement of animals across the 
boundaries of the zone taken into account. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     10 
PART
Text Len: 748
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                             10 
PART II - General Procedures (Minimum Requirements) 
 
A.  Authority to implement and administer tuberculosis program control and eradication measures 
State laws and/or regulations must be in place to provide the authority to apply tuberculosis tests to any livestock, 
and to restrict the movement of any livestock, or any other animal(s), including captive wildlife suspected of being 
affected with, or exposed to M. bovis, at such times as may be deemed necessary by the cooperating State or 
Federal animal health officials.  These officials reserve the right to supervise and monitor any tuberculosis testing 
or any other official tuberculosis control and eradication activities conducted by an Accredited Veterinarian or a 
designated Accredited Veterinarian.  (Note:  Any livestock that are being considered for Johne’s disease 
vaccination must be negative to an official tuberculosis test prior to such vaccination.) 
B.  Personnel authorized to apply official tuberculosis tests 
Official tuberculosis tests shall be conducted by State or Federal animal health veterinarians by Accredited 
Veterinarians (CFT test only); or by designated Accredited Veterinarians.  Technicians employed by State or 
Federal governments and approved by such governments may conduct routine screening tuberculosis (CFT) 
tests when directly supervised by State or Federal animal health veterinarians. 
 
C.  Approved laboratories 
 
The primary laboratory for all tuberculosis diagnostic purposes shall be NVSL, Ames, Iowa.  State, Federal, or 

Text Len: 1620
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.  Technicians employed by State or 
Federal governments and approved by such governments may conduct routine screening tuberculosis (CFT) 
tests when directly supervised by State or Federal animal health veterinarians. 
 
C.  Approved laboratories 
 
The primary laboratory for all tuberculosis diagnostic purposes shall be NVSL, Ames, Iowa.  State, Federal, or 
NAHLN veterinary laboratories may also be recognized by APHIS to conduct official tuberculosis program 
diagnostic testing.  FSIS laboratory results are acceptable for tissue examination of regular kill slaughter cattle or 
bison in those cases where no submission was made to NVSL. 
 
D.  Presumptive diagnostic test 
 
The CFT test is the official test for routine use in individual cattle or bison and herds of such animals where the 
tuberculosis status of the animals is unknown.  Cattle and bison shall not be subjected to a CFT retest at an 
interval of less than 60 days. 
 
E.   Supplemental diagnostic tests and procedures 
 
 1.   The CCT test is an official  test for retesting cattle or bison tuberculin test suspects.  It shall be applied 
only by a State or Federal regulatory veterinarian specifically trained in conducting the test and shall not 
be used in known affected herds without the prior written consent of cooperating State-Federal animal 
health officials.  The CCT test shall not be used as a primary test for animals of unknown status.  
 
 2.   The bovine interferon gamma assay may be used in cattle herds only, and only  when approved by the 
Chief State Animal Health Official and AVIC as an official test for use in the State and with the 
concurrence of the DTE and the VS Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist,
Text Len: 1710
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 for animals of unknown status.  
 
 2.   The bovine interferon gamma assay may be used in cattle herds only, and only  when approved by the 
Chief State Animal Health Official and AVIC as an official test for use in the State and with the 
concurrence of the DTE and the VS Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist, as outlined in Part III, A.4. 
 
 3.   Currently, histopathology, diagnostic bacterio logy, and PCR assay of formalin-fixed tissue are all 
supplemental diagnostic procedures approved for use in the program.  These procedures should be used 
in conjunction with tuberculosis test results and necropsy or slaughter data to assign herd status. 
 
F.   Primary diagnostic test 
 
 1.   The CT test is the recommended test for use in herds affected with bovine tuberculosis and is required as 
the initial test for testing exposed cattle or bison from such herds.  The CT test shall be applied only by a 
veterinarian employed by the State or Federal government.  Results of a CT test can only be classified as 
reactor or negative. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                       
Text Len: 1182
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                              11
 2.   The CFT test is a primary diagnostic test in ca ttle or bison when used in lieu of the CT test in herds 
affected with bovine tuberculosis.  Any response shall warrant the reactor classification.  The CFT test 
may only be used as a primary diagnostic test when applied by a veterinarian employed by the State or 
Federal government and with the approval of the DTE or Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
 
G.   Tuberculin test interpretation 
 
 1.   Decisions will be based upon the professional judgm ent of the testing veterinarian in accordance with the 
policy established by the cooperating State and Federal animal health officials and the test requirements 
outlined in these UM&R under Part III, A. 
 
 2.   The injection site on each animal shall be  palpated and any responses recorded and reported. 
  Observation without palpation is not acceptable a nd shall constitute cause for removal of veterinary
  accreditation. 
 
H.  Cleaning and disinfection of premises, conveyances, and materials 
 
All premises—including all structures, ho lding facilities, feed and water troughs, conveyances, and materials— 
that are determined by the appropriate cooperating State and Federal animal health officials to constitute a health 
hazard
Text Len: 1368
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 cause for removal of veterinary
  accreditation. 
 
H.  Cleaning and disinfection of premises, conveyances, and materials 
 
All premises—including all structures, ho lding facilities, feed and water troughs, conveyances, and materials— 
that are determined by the appropriate cooperating State and Federal animal health officials to constitute a health 
hazard to humans or animals because of bovine tuberculosis shall be properly cleaned and disinfected.  This 
shall be done in accordance with procedures approved by such State and Federal animal health officials within  
15 days after the removal of tuberculosis-affected or exposed cattle and bison and other tuberculosis-affected or 
exposed livestock.  However, these officials, for reasons satisfactory to them, may extend the time limit for 
disinfection to 30 days when a request for such extension is received before the expiration date of the original  
15-day period allowed. 
 
I.  Determination of the State-of-origin of infected animals 
 
Tuberculosis found during slaughter inspection or otherwise in any livestock will be considered to have originated 
in the State where the animal was slaughtered or the disease was disclosed unless successful traceback 
procedures identify another State as the original source. 
 
J.   Identification 
 
 1.  All cattle or bison tested shall be officially identifi ed at the time an official tuberculosis test is conducted. 
 
 2.   Cattle or bison moved in channels of tr ade within a State or zone shall be individually identified as 
approved by the Chief State Animal Health Official and recorded as to origin and destination at the first 
concentration point (dealer, livestock auction, stockyard, etc.) as follows: 
 
 a.  Cattle or bison over 2 years of  age that
Text Len: 1778
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 or bison moved in channels of tr ade within a State or zone shall be individually identified as 
approved by the Chief State Animal Health Official and recorded as to origin and destination at the first 
concentration point (dealer, livestock auction, stockyard, etc.) as follows: 
 
 a.  Cattle or bison over 2 years of  age that are returned to farms or ranches shall be identified by official 
eartag, backtag, premises identification number, or by an official brand.  If identified by brand, the 
cattle or bison must be accompanied by a completed official brand release document acceptable to 
the Chief State Animal Health Official. 
 
  b.   Cattle or bison that are marketed for immedi ate slaughter shall be identified by eartag, sale tag,
    or official backtag.  A completed official brand release document that is acceptable to the Chief
    State Animal Health Official may be used to identify  lots of animals having a single origin that are
    shipped directly to slaughter. 
 
 
K.  Dealer Registration and Recordkeeping 
 
Any dealer who purchases, deals in, or sells cattle or bison; or who acts as a commission representative or 
broker; or who operates and conducts an auction in which cattle or bison are sold, must be registered or  
licensed with the appropriate State agency and maintain the records required to facilitate the traceback of 
affected, exposed, suspect, or reactor animals by State animal health officials to the herd of origin or other  
 
                                                      
Text Len: 1537
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
affected, exposed, suspect, or reactor animals by State animal health officials to the herd of origin or other  
 
                                                                                                                                                                     12 
point of original infection.  Such records must be maintained for a minimum of 2 years as of January 1, 2005;  
3 years as of January 1, 2006; 4 years as of January 1, 2007; and 5 years as of January 1, 2008.  Such records 
must be made available to State or Federal animal health officials, upon request, during normal business hours. 
 
 1.   Dealer registration—The State agen cy shall have authority, after due notice and after providing an 
opportunity for a hearing to the individual or firm involved, to deny an application for registration and to 
suspend or cancel the registration when the agency is satisfied that one or more of the following 
conditions prevail: 
 
  a.   There is adequate evidence to establish intent to violate or circumvent recordkeeping  
    requirements of this section, other animal health regulations, or both. 
 
  b.  There is
Text Len: 1150
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 registration and to 
suspend or cancel the registration when the agency is satisfied that one or more of the following 
conditions prevail: 
 
  a.   There is adequate evidence to establish intent to violate or circumvent recordkeeping  
    requirements of this section, other animal health regulations, or both. 
 
  b.  There is a demonstrated history of repeat ed inability to trace to the point of origin those 
    affected, exposed, suspect,  or reactor animals handled by the dealer. 
 
A brand law or regulation that accomplishes the traceback purposes of this section will be considered an 
acceptable alternative to dealer registration.  Acceptance of this alternative will be based on an overall review, 
conducted by the Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist and/or an APHIS program review team, of the 
provisions and accomplishments of the State program in achieving the effective traceback of all animals to 
the herd of origin or other point of original exposure. 
 
 2.   Violations/remedies—Provisions shall exist for State animal health officials to take such action as 
necessary to enforce compliance with any provision of the recommended procedures discussed in these 
UM&R.  This shall include the authority to subpoena persons and/or records in violation of these 
minimum standards as well as authority for the appropriate State officials to petition the local court having 
venue for an order to enforce such subpoenas.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                  
Text Len: 1529
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     13
Part III — Standard Procedures (Minimum Requirements) 
 
 
 
A.  Classification of cattle and bison tested 
 
 1.   CFT test—All responses shall be recorded and the animal classified as suspect unless, in the 
professional judgment of the testing veterinarian and/or the DTE, the reactor classification is indicated. 
 
 2.   CT test—All animals with a response shall be classified as reactors. 
 
 3.   CCT test—Responses shall be recorded and plotted on the CCT scattergram (VS Form 6–22D).  
Classification shall be according to the zone in which the animal is plotted (negative, suspect, or reactor); 
however, animals plotting in the suspect zone on two successive CCT tests shall be classified reactor.  
 
Exceptions to the classification listed above may occur when animals plotting in the reactor zone or plotting in the 
Text Len: 1028
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
VS Form 6–22D).  
Classification shall be according to the zone in which the animal is plotted (negative, suspect, or reactor); 
however, animals plotting in the suspect zone on two successive CCT tests shall be classified reactor.  
 
Exceptions to the classification listed above may occur when animals plotting in the reactor zone or plotting in the 
suspect zone on two consecutive CCT tests are, at the discretion of the DTE or Regional Tuberculosis 
Epidemiologist, reclassified as suspect, provided that there has been no known association of the herd with  
M. bovis.  Animals classified as suspect in these situations must be moved directly to slaughter under permit.  
The postmortem examination shall be witnessed by a State or Federal animal health veterinarian in addition to 
the attending FSIS or State meat inspection veterinarian.  Specimens, to include any tissue with granulomatous 
appearing lesions and representative head and thoracic lymph nodes, must be submitted for laboratory 
examination.  If such suspects fail to disclose gross evidence of bovine tuberculosis, are negative on 
histopathology and bacteriological cultures for M. bovis, and a complete epidemiologic investigation, including a 
herd test of all eligible animals, fails to disclose evidence of bovine tuberculosis or exposure thereto, the herd, 
with the concurrence of the DTE and the Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist, may be considered free of bovine 
tuberculosis.  Any additional exceptions by the DTE and the Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist may be made 
only with the concurrence of the National Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
 
 4.  The bovine interferon gamma assay, when  approved for use as an official tuberculosis test in the State  
  by the Chief
Text Len: 1761
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ovine 
tuberculosis.  Any additional exceptions by the DTE and the Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist may be made 
only with the concurrence of the National Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
 
 4.  The bovine interferon gamma assay, when  approved for use as an official tuberculosis test in the State  
  by the Chief State Animal Health Official and AVIC  may, at the discretion of the DTE and with the 
concurrence of a VS Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist, be used in cattle herds as follows: 
 
  a.   In parallel testing with the CCT test. 
 
  b.   As a replacement for the CCT test for retest ing CFT test suspects.  (CCT test suspects must be
   retested negative on the CCT test prior to  reclassifying such suspects as negative.) 
 
c. In parallel with the CFT test or CT test  in affected herds. 
  
 Results of the bovine interferon gamma assay shall be reported by the testing laboratory to the appropriate 
DTE and/or Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist for classification.  Animals positive on a single bovine 
interferon gamma assay should be classified as suspect unless the DTE or the Regional Tuberculosis 
Epidemiologist determines that a reactor classification is justified.  Animals positive on two successive bovine 
interferon gamma assays should be classified as reactor; exceptions to a reactor classification must be 
justified and documented by the DTE or Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
        
       5.  Reclassification of animals—When a herd test results in the confirmation of bovine tuberculosis, all 
responders on the initial
Text Len: 1573
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ays should be classified as reactor; exceptions to a reactor classification must be 
justified and documented by the DTE or Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
        
       5.  Reclassification of animals—When a herd test results in the confirmation of bovine tuberculosis, all 
responders on the initial CFT test shall be reclassified as suspects or reactors.  Such animals shall be 
promptly identified and subjected to postmortem examination under the direct supervision of a State or 
Federal animal health veterinarian. 
 
B.  Reporting of tests 
 
A report of all approved tuberculosis tests shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements of the 
cooperating State and Federal animal health officials.  The report shall include the official identification, age, sex, 
and breed of each animal and a record of all responses and test interpretations. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     14 
C.  Disposition of tuberculin-responding cattle and bison 
 
 1.   Reactors shall remain on the premises where
Text Len: 1151
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                              14 
C.  Disposition of tuberculin-responding cattle and bison 
 
 1.   Reactors shall remain on the premises where they were disclosed until a State or Federal permit for 
movement has been obtained.  Movement for immediate slaughter shall be within 15 days of 
classification and shall be directly to a slaughtering establishment where approved State or Federal 
inspection is maintained.  Alternatively, the animals may be destroyed on the premises or in a 
postmortem examination facility under the direct supervision of a State or Federal animal health 
veterinarian to ensure that a proper postmortem examination is conducted; that the carcasses are 
disposed of by deep burial or burning, and that the facilities are adequately cleaned and disinfected. 
 
 2.   Herds containing suspects to the CFT test shall be quarantined until the suspect animals are: 
 
  a.   Negative to a CCT test; or 
 
  b.  Negative on the bovine interferon gamma assa y (when approved for use as stipulated in Part III, 
A.4.); or  
 
  c.  Shipped, under permit, directly to slaught er in accordance with State and Federal laws and 
   regulations with postmortem examinatio ns conducted as outlined in Part III, C.5. 
 
 3.   Suspects to the CCT  test must be: 
 
  a.   Negative to a  CCT retest 60 or more days after the previous CCT injection; or 
 
  b
Text Len: 1389
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Federal laws and 
   regulations with postmortem examinatio ns conducted as outlined in Part III, C.5. 
 
 3.   Suspects to the CCT  test must be: 
 
  a.   Negative to a  CCT retest 60 or more days after the previous CCT injection; or 
 
  b.   Shipped under permit directly to slaughter. 
 
 4. Animals positive on the bovine interferon gamma assay and classified as suspect must be: 
  
 a. Negative on a  bovine interferon gamma assay retest conducted within 30 days of the CFT injection 
(the DTE or Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist must concur with the retest); or 
 
 b. Shipped, under permit, directly to slaughter for postmortem examination. 
 
 5.   Postmortem examinations shall be witnessed by a State or Federal animal health veterinarian and 
   selected tissue specimens, to include any tissue with granulomatous appearing lesions and 
  representative head and thoracic lymph nodes, must be submitted for laboratory examination. 
 
D.  Interstate or interzone movement requirements for tuberculosis (cattle or bison not known to be 
affected with or exposed to tuberculosis)   Note:  See Appendix A for an abbreviated outline of test 
requirements for cattle or bison from nonaccredited herds, other than commuter herds, being moved for breeding 
or feeding purposes.  See Appendix B for an abbreviated outline of test requirements for cattle or bison from 
accredited herds being moved for breeding or feeding purposes. 
       
 1.   From Accredited-free States or zones:  cattle or  bison that originate in an Accredited-free State or
Text Len: 1558
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 being moved for breeding 
or feeding purposes.  See Appendix B for an abbreviated outline of test requirements for cattle or bison from 
accredited herds being moved for breeding or feeding purposes. 
       
 1.   From Accredited-free States or zones:  cattle or  bison that originate in an Accredited-free State or zone 
may be moved interstate with no restrictions for tuberculosis.  
 
 2.   From Modified Accredited Advanced States or zones:   
 
a. The cattle or bison are moved directly to slau ghter at an approved slaughtering establishment, or are 
either officially identified or identified by an official premises identification number and are moved 
through one approved livestock facility and then direct to an approved slaughtering establishment.  
  
  b.   The cattle or bison are sexually intact heif ers moved directly to an approved feedlot, or are moved 
through one approved livestock facility and then direct to an approved feedlot, or are steers or spayed 
heifers; and are either officially identified or identified by an official premises identification number. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                               
Text Len: 1237
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                      15
  c.  The cattle or bison are from an accredited herd and are accompanied by a certificate stating that
   the accredited herd completed the testing ne cessary for Accredited status with negative results
   within 2 years prior to the date of movement. 
 
  d.  The cattle or bison are sexually intact animals that:  (1) are not from an accredited herd or a 
commuter herd; (2) are officially identified or are identified by an official premises identification 
number; and (3) are accompanied by a certificate stating that the animals included in the movement 
that are 18 months of age and older, tested negative to an official tuberculosis test conducted within 
60 days prior to the date of movement.  Except that:  the individual animal(s) to be moved need not 
be retested if they were included on a negative herd of origin herd test conducted within 6 months of 
the interstate movement. 
  
 3.   From Modified Accredited States or zones: 
 
  a.   The cattle or bison are moved directly to slaughter at an approved slaughtering establishment, or are 
either officially identified or identified by an official premises identification number and are moved 
through one approved livestock facility and then direct to an approved slaughtering establishment. 
 
b. The cattle or bison are sexually intact heifers moved
Text Len: 1427
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
: 
 
  a.   The cattle or bison are moved directly to slaughter at an approved slaughtering establishment, or are 
either officially identified or identified by an official premises identification number and are moved 
through one approved livestock facility and then direct to an approved slaughtering establishment. 
 
b. The cattle or bison are sexually intact heifers moved directly to an approved feedlot, or are moved 
through one approved livestock facility and then direct to an approved feedlot, or are steers or spayed 
heifers; are either officially identified or identified by an official premises identification number and are 
accompanied by a certificate stating that the animals included in the movement that are 2 months of 
age and older were classified negative to an official tuberculosis test conducted within 60 days prior 
to the date of movement. 
 
  c.  The cattle or bison are from an accredited herd and are accompanied by a certificate stating that
   the accredited herd completed the testing ne cessary for Accredited status with negative results
   within 1 year prior to the date of movement. 
 
  d.  The cattle or bison are sexually intact animals that:  (1) are not from an accredited herd or a 
commuter herd; (2) are officially identified or are identified by an official premises identification 
number; (3) are accompanied by a certificate stating that they are from a herd of origin that was 
negative to an official tuberculosis herd test of all cattle and bison 12 months of age and older 
conducted within 1 year prior to the date of movement; and (4) that the individual animal(s) to be 
moved that are 2 months of age and older tested negative to an additional official tuberculosis test 
conducted within 60 days prior to the date of movement.  Except that:  the additional test
Text Len: 1825
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 all cattle and bison 12 months of age and older 
conducted within 1 year prior to the date of movement; and (4) that the individual animal(s) to be 
moved that are 2 months of age and older tested negative to an additional official tuberculosis test 
conducted within 60 days prior to the date of movement.  Except that:  the additional test is not 
required if the animal(s) are moved interstate or interzone within 60 days following the herd of origin 
herd test and provided the animals to be moved that are two months of age and older were included 
on the herd of origin herd test. 
        
 4.   From Accreditation Preparatory States or zones: 
 
  a.  The cattle or bison are moved directly to sl aughter at an approved slaughtering establishment, or are 
either officially identified or are identified by an official premises identification number and are moved 
through one approved livestock facility and then direct to an approved slaughtering establishment. 
 
  b.  The cattle or bison are sexually intact heifers moved directly to  an approved feedlot, or are moved                       
through one approved livestock facility and then direct to an approved feedlot, or are steers or spayed 
heifers; are either officially identified or identified by an official premises identification number and are 
accompanied by a certificate stating that they are from a herd of origin that was negative to a herd 
test conducted within 1 year prior to the date of movement and that the individual animal(s) to be 
moved tested negative to an official tuberculosis test conducted within 60 days prior to the date of 
movement.  Except that:  the additional test is not
Text Len: 1676
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 are 
accompanied by a certificate stating that they are from a herd of origin that was negative to a herd 
test conducted within 1 year prior to the date of movement and that the individual animal(s) to be 
moved tested negative to an official tuberculosis test conducted within 60 days prior to the date of 
movement.  Except that:  the additional test is not required if the animal(s) to be moved are moved 
interstate or interzone within 60 days following the herd of origin herd test and provided the animals 
to be moved were included on the herd of origin herd test. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     16 
  c.   The cattle or bison are from an accredited herd; are officially identified; and are accompanied by
   a certificate stating that the accredited he rd completed the testing necessary with negative 
   results within 1 year prior to the date of movement and that the animal(s) to be moved were 
   negative to an official tuberculosis test c onducted within 60 days prior to the date of movement. 
      
Text Len: 1157
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
; and are accompanied by
   a certificate stating that the accredited he rd completed the testing necessary with negative 
   results within 1 year prior to the date of movement and that the animal(s) to be moved were 
   negative to an official tuberculosis test c onducted within 60 days prior to the date of movement. 
                     
 5.  From nonaccredited States or zones:  may be move d interstate or interzone only if the cattle or bison are 
accompanied by VS Form 1-27 and are moved interstate or interzone in an officially sealed means of 
conveyance directly to an approved slaughtering establishment for immediate slaughter. 
 
 6.   Cattle or bison that are members of a recogn ized and approved commuter herd may be moved interstate 
or interzone in accordance with the applicable commuter herd agreement.   
 
 No cattle or bison  responding to an official tuberculosis test are eligible for interstate movement unless such 
animal(s) are subsequently classified “negative for M. bovis” based upon an official CCT test and/or bovine 
interferon gamma assay.  (Note:  9 CFR, Section 77.17 (c), prohibits the interstate movement of suspect 
cattle and bison and negative cattle or bison in herds containing suspect cattle or bison (except for slaughter) 
until the tuberculosis status of all suspect(s) has been determined.) 
 
E.  Procedures in tuberculosis-affected herds 
 
Disclosure of tuberculosis in any herd shall be followed by a complete epidemiologic investigation.  All cattle 
and/or bison in herds from which tuberculosis-affected cattle and/or bison originate, and all cattle and/or
Text Len: 1617
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
until the tuberculosis status of all suspect(s) has been determined.) 
 
E.  Procedures in tuberculosis-affected herds 
 
Disclosure of tuberculosis in any herd shall be followed by a complete epidemiologic investigation.  All cattle 
and/or bison in herds from which tuberculosis-affected cattle and/or bison originate, and all cattle and/or bison 
that are known to have associated with affected cattle and/or bison, shall be tested promptly.  These procedures 
shall apply to adjacent and contact herds as well as to the evaluation and testing of possible source herds for the 
affected herd.  Herds that have received exposed animals shall be tested following the slaughter or testing of 
exposed animals.  Every effort shall be made to ensure the immediate elimination of the disease from all species 
of livestock on the premises.  The first consideration in affected herds is the depopulation of the entire herd.  If 
depopulation cannot be accomplished, the herd shall be handled as outlined in Part III, J. 
 
F.  Procedures in tuberculosis-affected feedlots 
 
A tuberculosis-affected feedlot shall be handled in the same manner as an affected herd in regard to 
epidemiologic investigation and the development of epidemiologic tracings for animal movements into and out of 
the feedlot.  Emphasis during investigations and testing shall be on detecting possible spread from the feedlot.  
Cattle and bison in feedlots known to be exposed to tuberculosis shall be quarantined and shipped under permit 
directly to slaughter.  Feedlots or portions of feedlots that have contained tuberculosis infected and exposed cattle 
or bison shall be vacated, cleaned, and disinfected following the removal of such cattle or bison to slaughter.  
Restocking a feedlot, or portion
Text Len: 1777
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 feedlots known to be exposed to tuberculosis shall be quarantined and shipped under permit 
directly to slaughter.  Feedlots or portions of feedlots that have contained tuberculosis infected and exposed cattle 
or bison shall be vacated, cleaned, and disinfected following the removal of such cattle or bison to slaughter.  
Restocking a feedlot, or portion of a feedlot that has contained tuberculosis infected and exposed cattle or bison, 
shall not begin until the required cleaning and disinfection have been completed and the feedlot or portion of the 
feedlot that contained infected cattle or bison has been vacant of all livestock for a minimum of 30 days. Except 
that: Approved feedlots and approved pens are exempt from the requirement to hold pens vacant for 30 days 
following the required cleaning and disinfection. 
 
G.  International movement requirements for tuberculosis (cattle or bison not known to be affected with 
or exposed to tuberculosis) 
 
No cattle or bison responding to an official tuberculosis test are eligible for international movement.  The testing 
protocol for international movement shall be in accordance with the tuberculosis test requirements of 9 CFR, 
Section 91.5, and with the tuberculosis test requirements of the receiving countries. 
 
H.  Identification of reactor cattle and bison 
 
Reactor cattle and bison shall be identified by branding the letter “T” on the left hip near the tailhead, not less than 
2 inches (5 cm) and not more than 3 inches (7.5 cm) high, and by tagging with an approved metal eartag bearing 
a serial number and inscription “U.S. Reactor” or a similar State reactor tag suitably attached to the left ear of 
each animal.  Such reactors may be shipped to slaughter under permit.
Text Len: 1756
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
2 inches (5 cm) and not more than 3 inches (7.5 cm) high, and by tagging with an approved metal eartag bearing 
a serial number and inscription “U.S. Reactor” or a similar State reactor tag suitably attached to the left ear of 
each animal.  Such reactors may be shipped to slaughter under permit.  In lieu of branding, the reactor(s) may be 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     17
shipped, under permit, to slaughter in an officially sealed vehicle or accompanied to slaughter by a State or 
Federal animal health official, provided the letters “TB” are applied to the left hip with yellow paint.    
 
I.   Identification of exposed cattle, bison, and other livestock 
 
 1. To be eligible for Federal indemnity, exposed cattle and bison shall be identified by branding the 
 letter “S” on the left hip near the tailhead, not less than 2 inches (5 cm) and not more than 3 inches (7.5
 cm) high, and by tagging
Text Len: 1044
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Identification of exposed cattle, bison, and other livestock 
 
 1. To be eligible for Federal indemnity, exposed cattle and bison shall be identified by branding the 
 letter “S” on the left hip near the tailhead, not less than 2 inches (5 cm) and not more than 3 inches (7.5
 cm) high, and by tagging with an approved metal eartag bearing a serial number attached to either
 ear of each animal.  Such exposed animals must be shipped to slaughter under permit.   In lieu of  
branding, the letter “S” may be applied to the left hip of exposed cattle and bison with yellow paint.  Such 
nonbranded animals must be accompanied to slaughter by a State or Federal representative or be 
shipped under permit in a vehicle closed with official seals. 
 
 2.  To be eligible for Federal indemnity, other expos ed livestock shall be identified by tagging with a serially 
numbered metal eartag attached to either ear.  All such animals to be destroyed shall be transported, 
under permit, to the place of destruction in vehicles closed with official seals or shall be accompanied to 
the place of destruction by a Federal or State representative.  Animals may be destroyed and disposed of 
under the direct supervision of a Federal or State representative on the premises where the animals were 
exposed.  
 
J.   Quarantine procedures 
 
 1.   All herds in which reactor animals are discl osed shall be quarantined immediately.  Exposed animals 
must remain on the premises where disclosed unless a State or Federal permit for movement has been 
obtained.  Movement of animals for immediate slaughter must be shipped directly to a slaughtering 
establishment where approved State or Federal inspection is administered.  Exposed animals must be 
identified
Text Len: 1749
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 herds in which reactor animals are discl osed shall be quarantined immediately.  Exposed animals 
must remain on the premises where disclosed unless a State or Federal permit for movement has been 
obtained.  Movement of animals for immediate slaughter must be shipped directly to a slaughtering 
establishment where approved State or Federal inspection is administered.  Exposed animals must be 
identified by official eartags.  The “S” branding of exposed animals is required unless the letter “S” is 
applied to the left hip with yellow paint and the animals are shipped in a sealed vehicle under permit or, in 
lieu of sealing the vehicle, the animals are accompanied to slaughter by a State or Federal 
representative. 
 
 2.   Sale of feeder calves from quarantined herds sh all be restricted.  Feeder calves under 12 months of age 
that have passed a CFT test within 60 days may be permitted to move intrastate (to include between 
zones within the same State) to an approved feedlot. 
  
 3.   Herds in which M. bovis infection has been confirmed shall remain under quarantine, if not depopulated, 
until all requirements of an individual herd plan have been completed.  The herd testing requirement shall 
consist of at least two consecutive tests of the herd in which all responders to a primary diagnostic test 
(CT or CFT tests) have been examined postmortem with no evidence of M. bovis infection, followed by 
six consecutive tests of the herd in which all responders to a primary diagnostic test (CFT test only) have 
been classified negative to a supplemental test(s) (CCT test, bovine interferon gamma assay) and/or 
postmortem procedures.  The testing intervals for the eight required herd tests
Text Len: 1714
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 evidence of M. bovis infection, followed by 
six consecutive tests of the herd in which all responders to a primary diagnostic test (CFT test only) have 
been classified negative to a supplemental test(s) (CCT test, bovine interferon gamma assay) and/or 
postmortem procedures.  The testing intervals for the eight required herd tests for quarantine release are 
as follows:  (1) at least 60 days between tests for the first four herd tests; (2) at least 180 days between 
the fourth and fifth herd test; and (3) at least 12 months between tests for the sixth through eighth herd 
tests.  If the herd is located in an area where M. bovis is known to affect one or more species of wildlife, 
the herd will not be released from quarantine prior to implementation of the provisions of a herd plan that 
is designed to mitigate the potential for exposure and that is approved by the DTE and the Regional 
Tuberculosis Epidemiologist.  All animals moved from the premises prior to being released from 
quarantine shall be shipped directly to slaughter and shall be accompanied by a permit issued by a State 
or Federal representative.  The herd must undergo two additional negative annual herd tests after the 
quarantine is released.  The two required postquarantine release tests may be applied to accreditation 
status. 
 
 4.  Herds in which only NGL reactor(s) occur and selected tissues, to include representative head and 
thoracic lymph nodes, are found negative on histopathology, and in which no evidence of M. bovis 
infection has been disclosed, may be released from quarantine only after a negative retest of the entire 
 
                     
Text Len: 1653
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 to include representative head and 
thoracic lymph nodes, are found negative on histopathology, and in which no evidence of M. bovis 
infection has been disclosed, may be released from quarantine only after a negative retest of the entire 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     18 
herd is completed at least 60 days subsequent to slaughter of the NGL reactors, unless such retest is 
exempted by the DTE in consultation with the Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
 
 5.   Herds in which at least one suspect and no reactor animals are disclosed shall be quarantined until
  all suspects are retested and classified negative, or shipped directly to slaughter under permit and
  no evidence of M. bovis infection is disclosed. 
  
If animals are slaughtered as suspects according to Part III, A., but show no gross lesions and selected 
tissues, to include representative head and thoracic lymph nodes, are found negative on histopathology 
and bacteriological culture for M. bovis and a complete epidemiologic investigation, including a herd test
Text Len: 1180
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. bovis infection is disclosed. 
  
If animals are slaughtered as suspects according to Part III, A., but show no gross lesions and selected 
tissues, to include representative head and thoracic lymph nodes, are found negative on histopathology 
and bacteriological culture for M. bovis and a complete epidemiologic investigation, including a herd test 
of all eligible animals, fails to disclose evidence of bovine tuberculosis or exposure thereto, the herd, with 
the concurrence of the DTE and Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist, may be considered free of bovine 
tuberculosis.  A 90-120 day herd retest is recommended. 
 
 6.   Herds indicated as the source(s) of slaughter  traceback case investigations shall be placed under 
  quarantine within 15  days of notification, and a herd test of all eligible livestock shall be scheduled. 
 
The testing of source herds of regular kill animals having lesions of bovine tuberculosis shall be done by 
State or Federal animal health veterinarians.  When slaughter and marketing records provide strong 
evidence that traces to the herd of origin, all animals responding to the CFT test shall be classified as 
reactors.  In all other cases, with approval of the DTE or Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist, the CCT 
test and/or bovine interferon gamma assay may be used to classify responders to the CFT test. 
 
 7.   Testing of source herds of reactors disclosed in affected herds shall be by State or Federal regulatory 
veterinarians using the CFT test procedure.  Responding animals may be classified as reactors or, if 
classified as suspects, may be retested by the CCT test and/or the bovine interferon gamma assay. 
  

Text Len: 1678
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 7.   Testing of source herds of reactors disclosed in affected herds shall be by State or Federal regulatory 
veterinarians using the CFT test procedure.  Responding animals may be classified as reactors or, if 
classified as suspects, may be retested by the CCT test and/or the bovine interferon gamma assay. 
  
 8. Herds containing known bovine tuberculosis expo sed animal(s) shall be placed under quarantine until the 
tuberculosis status of the exposed animal(s) has been determined by postmortem examination or by at 
least one negative CT test and the remainder of the test eligible animals in the herd are determined to be 
negative following an official CFT test. 
 
K.   Retest schedules for high-risk herds  
 
 1.  In herds with a history of lesions suggestive of bovine tuberculosis (but not confirmed), two negative 
annual herd tests shall be conducted after the herd is released from quarantine.  The first test is to be 
applied approximately 1 year after release from quarantine. 
 
 2.  In a newly assembled herd on premises wher e a tuberculosis-affected herd has been depopulated, two 
negative annual herd tests shall be applied to all cattle, bison, and other livestock.  The first test must be 
applied approximately 6 months after assembly of the new herd.  The exclusion of any species from 
these herd test requirements must be approved by the DTE or Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist.  If 
the premises are vacated for over 1 year, these test requirements can be waived by the DTE or the 
Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
 
 3.   Exposed animals previously sold from a known-a ffected herd shall be depopulated with
Text Len: 1655
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 test requirements must be approved by the DTE or Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist.  If 
the premises are vacated for over 1 year, these test requirements can be waived by the DTE or the 
Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
 
 3.   Exposed animals previously sold from a known-a ffected herd shall be depopulated with indemnity if at all 
possible.  If the exposed animal(s) are not depopulated, only the CT test shall be used as the initial test.  
All responding animals shall be classified as reactors.  If negative to the initial test, the exposed animal(s) 
will subsequently be handled as if they were a part of the affected herd of origin in respect to quarantine, 
testing for quarantine release, and the two negative annual tests following release from quarantine.  The 
remainder of the herd shall be tested as outlined in (b) below and, if negative, retested in 1 year with the 
CFT test.  The receiving herd shall initially be tested as follows: 
 
  a.   If lesions of tuberculosi s (based on histopathologic examination) are found in the exposed animal(s), 
and/or M. bovis is isolated from tissues submitted from exposed animal(s) for bacteriological 
examination, the remainder of the herd shall be depopulated or tested, preferably with the CT test. 
 
 
                                                                                  
Text Len: 1361
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                                                                   19
  b.  In all other cases, the remainder of the herd  shall be tested by the CFT test.  The responding animals 
may be classified as suspects and retested with the CCT test and/or the bovine interferon gamma 
assay. 
 4.   In herds where M. bovis infection has been confirmed but the herd has not been depopulated, testing 
shall be in accordance with Part III, J. 3.  
 
L.   Surveillance around an M. bovis affected herd where wildlife are known to be affected  
 
All livestock herds, within a 10-mile radius, will be tested within 6 months of any diagnosis of bovine tuberculosis 
in livestock or free ranging wildlife. 
 
                                                                 
Text Len: 857
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ine tuberculosis 
in livestock or free ranging wildlife. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     20 
Part IV — Accredited Herd Plan for Cattle or Bison 
 
 
 
A. Animals to be tested—Testing of herds for accreditation or reaccreditation shall include all  
 test eligible cattle or bison as follows:   
 
 1. In Accredited Free States or zones:  all cattle or  bison 24 months of age and older as evidenced by the 
central incisors being fully erupted and in wear.   
 
 2.  In Modified Accredited Advanced States or zone s:  all cattle or bison 18 months of age and older as 
evidenced by the loss of the central deciduous incisors.  
 
 3. In Modified Accredited States or zones:  all cattle or bison 12 months of age and older. 
 
 4. In Accreditation Preparatory States or zones:  all cattle and bison regardless of age. 
 
(Note:  The animals required to be tested in
Text Len: 1000
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 the loss of the central deciduous incisors.  
 
 3. In Modified Accredited States or zones:  all cattle or bison 12 months of age and older. 
 
 4. In Accreditation Preparatory States or zones:  all cattle and bison regardless of age. 
 
(Note:  The animals required to be tested in herds being tested for accreditation or reaccreditation in States 
having more than one status [split status state(s)] shall be the same for the whole State and shall be that of 
the lowest status of any zone within the State.) 
  
In previously affected herds that have been released from quarantine following the testing protocol outlined in 
Part III, J.3., the two required negative annual herd tests postquarantine release may be used to qualify the 
herd for accreditation.   
 
 All purchased additions shall be individually identifi ed and recorded on the test report as purchased additions 
 (PA) members of the herd at the ti me of the annual or biennial test. 
 
B.  Accreditation and reaccreditation —To qualify for Accredited herd status, the herd must pass at least two 
consecutive official tuberculosis tests conducted within an interval of 9-15 months with no evidence of bovine 
tuberculosis.  All animals must be bona fide members of the herd.  Additions to the herd during the qualifying 
period for accreditation, other than natural additions, must meet the requirements specified in Part IV, C.  
Herds meeting the qualifications for accreditation shall be issued a certificate of accreditation and other 
appropriate information shall be provided by the local State and Federal animal health officials to emphasize 
the significance of the herd-accreditation plan.   
 
In Accredited-free and Modified Accredited
Text Len: 1719
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 natural additions, must meet the requirements specified in Part IV, C.  
Herds meeting the qualifications for accreditation shall be issued a certificate of accreditation and other 
appropriate information shall be provided by the local State and Federal animal health officials to emphasize 
the significance of the herd-accreditation plan.   
 
In Accredited-free and Modified Accredited Advanced States or zones, the accreditation period will be 24 
months from the anniversary date and not 24 months from the date of the reaccreditation test.  To qualify for 
reaccreditation, the herd must pass a negative test within 21-27 months of the anniversary date. 
 
In Modified Accredited and Accreditation Preparatory States or zones, the accreditation period will be 12 
months from the anniversary date and not 12 months from the date of the reaccreditation test.  To qualify for 
reaccreditation, the herd must pass a test within 9-15 months of the anniversary date. 
 
For continuous herd accreditation, the reaccreditation test must be conducted on the anniversary date or 
within a time period of 3 months prior to the anniversary date.  If the reaccreditation test is conducted 
following the anniversary date, the Accredited status of the herd will be suspended until the reaccreditation 
test is completed.  If the reaccreditation test is not competed within 3 months following the anniversary date, 
the requirements for reaccrediting the herd will be the same as for initial herd accreditation. 
 
The DTE and Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist must jointly certify, in writing, that herds applying for 
Accreditation status, which are located in States or zones with wildlife reservoirs of bovine tuberculosis and/or 
States or zones with a tuberculosis status of Modified Accredited or lower, have taken adequate precautions 
and have
Text Len: 1849
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 as for initial herd accreditation. 
 
The DTE and Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist must jointly certify, in writing, that herds applying for 
Accreditation status, which are located in States or zones with wildlife reservoirs of bovine tuberculosis and/or 
States or zones with a tuberculosis status of Modified Accredited or lower, have taken adequate precautions 
and have in place appropriate biosecurity measures, which have been documented in a written herd plan, that 
ensure the herd has not been exposed to bovine tuberculosis during the accreditation process and will not be 
exposed to bovine tuberculosis following accreditation.  Minimal biosecurity requirements in the herd plan for 
herds applying for accreditation status in States or zones, with wildlife reservoirs of M. bovis must include 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     21
specific provisions for protecting livestock feeding sites and feed storage areas from being contaminated by 
M. bovis and provide effective strategies to reduce or divert wildlife populations from entering the premises of 
the accredited herd. 
 
C.  Additions—Accredited
Text Len: 1255
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        21
specific provisions for protecting livestock feeding sites and feed storage areas from being contaminated by 
M. bovis and provide effective strategies to reduce or divert wildlife populations from entering the premises of 
the accredited herd. 
 
C.  Additions—Accredited herd additions must or iginate directly from such herds as outlined  
 below and must meet the minimum tuberculosis test requirements as indicated:  
 
            Origin of Herd Addition(s)                                         Tuberculosis Test Requirement 
 
 
 1.   Accredited herd in a State or zone  No tuberculosis test requirement on the  
  recognized as Accredited-free within the  individual animal(s) addition(s). 
  past 5 years 
 
 2.   Accredited herd in a State or zone           Official negative tuberculosis test on the  
  not recognized as Accredited-free within i ndividual animal(s) addition(s) within 60  
  the past 5 years days prior to entering the premises of the  
  receiving accredited herd. 
 
 3.   Nonaccredited herd in an Accredited-fr ee Official negative tuberculosis test on the  
  State or zone     individual animal(s) addition(s) within 60  
        days prior to entering the premises of the  
        receiving accredited herd. 
 
 4. Non
Text Len: 1284
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Nonaccredited herd in an Accredited-fr ee Official negative tuberculosis test on the  
  State or zone     individual animal(s) addition(s) within 60  
        days prior to entering the premises of the  
        receiving accredited herd. 
 
 4. Nonaccredited  herd in a Modified Accredited  The herd of origin for the addition(s) must 
  Advanced State or zone recognized as  have received a negative herd test of all  
  Accredited-free within the past 5 years  cattle and bison 18 months of age or older 
        within the past 12 months.  Also, the 
individual animal(s) for addition that are   
2 months of age and older must have a  
negative tuberculosis test within 60 days  
prior to entering the premises of the  
accredited herd. 
 
 5. Nonaccredited  herd in a Modified Accredited  The herd of origin for the addition(s) must 
  Advanced State or zone not recognized   have received a negative herd test of all 
  as Accredited-free within the past 5 year s cattle and bison regardless of age (unless 
  under 6 months of age and nursing a 
  negative dam) within the past 12 months. 
  Also, the individual animal(s) for addition 
  that are 2 months of age and older must  
  have a negative tuberculosis test within 60  
  days prior to entering the premises of the 
       a c c r e d i t e d  h e r d .  
 
 6.   Nonaccredited  herd in a Modified Accredited  The herd
Text Len: 1388
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  that are 2 months of age and older must  
  have a negative tuberculosis test within 60  
  days prior to entering the premises of the 
       a c c r e d i t e d  h e r d .  
 
 6.   Nonaccredited  herd in a Modified Accredited  The herd of origin for the addition(s) must 
  State or zone recognized as Accredited-free    have received a negative herd test of all 
  within the past 5 years cattle and bison 12 months of age or older 
  within the past 12 months.  Also, the  
individual animal(s) for addition that are 2  
months of age and older must have a  
negative tuberculosis test within 60 days  
prior to entering the premises of the  
accredited herd.  The individual animal(s)  
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     22 
            Origin of Herd Addition(s) 
Text Len: 912
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         22 
            Origin of Herd Addition(s)                                          Tuberculosis Test Requirement 
 
for addition must also be isolated (geographic 
separation) from all members of the accredited  
herd until they are negative to a tuberculosis  
test conducted no sooner than 60 days from  
the date of entry onto the premises of the  
accredited herd. 
  
 7. Nonaccredited herd in a Modified Accredited The herd of origin for the addition(s) must 
  State or zone not recognized as Accredited- have received a negative herd test of all cattle  
  free within the past 5 years and bison regardless of age (unless under 6  
   months of age and nursing a negative dam)  
   within the past 12 months.  Also, the individual  
   animal(s) for addition that are 2 months of age 
   and older must have a negative tuberculosis  
   test within 60 days prior to entering the premises  
   of the accredited herd.  The individual animal(s)  
   for addition must also be isolated (geographic  
   separation) from all members of the accredited  
   herd until they are negative to a tuberculosis  
   retest conducted no sooner than
Text Len: 1201
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   test within 60 days prior to entering the premises  
   of the accredited herd.  The individual animal(s)  
   for addition must also be isolated (geographic  
   separation) from all members of the accredited  
   herd until they are negative to a tuberculosis  
   retest conducted no sooner than 60 days from  
   the date of entry onto the premises of the  
   accredited herd. 
 
 8. Nonaccredited herd in an Accreditation No  provisions for additions from nonaccredited 
  Preparatory State or zone herds.  A dditions must originate from Accredited  
   herds. 
    
  Animals added under (3), (4), (5), (6) or (7) in this section shall not receive Accredited herd 
  status for sale purposes until they have been me mbers of the herd at least 60 days and after being 
  retested with a negative result 60 or more days afte r entry.  In the case of animals added under (6)  
  or (7), Accredited herd status for sale purposes would not occur until such animals were retested 
  with a negative result 60 or more days following the test conducted to release them from isolation  
  (geographic separation)  and making them eligible to enter the Accredited herd. 
 
D. Artificial insemination— semen for artificial insemination in Accredited herds must be from sires in 
Accredited herds or from sires with a negative result on an official test for tuberculosis performed within 12 
months prior to the date of the semen collection.  
 
  
 
 
                   
Text Len: 1471
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 for artificial insemination in Accredited herds must be from sires in 
Accredited herds or from sires with a negative result on an official test for tuberculosis performed within 12 
months prior to the date of the semen collection.  
 
  
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     23
Part V—State or Zone Status 
 
 
 
A.  General provisions 
 
 1. Revocation or suspension of status—Di sclosure of tuberculosis in a State or zone and/or failure of a 
State or zone to take progressive steps to comply with these UM&R to seek out and eliminate bovine 
tuberculosis shall be cause for revocation or reduction of status. 
 
 2. A State or zone  may maintain status, as defined in 9 CFR, Section 77.5, if the State or zone complies 
with all of the procedures in these UM&R. 
 
 3. Tuberculosis must be compulsorily notifiable to State animal health authorities.  The State must have an
  infrastructure, laws, and regulations to make 
Text Len: 1061
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
. A State or zone  may maintain status, as defined in 9 CFR, Section 77.5, if the State or zone complies 
with all of the procedures in these UM&R. 
 
 3. Tuberculosis must be compulsorily notifiable to State animal health authorities.  The State must have an
  infrastructure, laws, and regulations to make  the disease notifiable and to ensure compliance. 
 
 4. The State must have an effective veterinary organi zation and infrastructure.  A State must have the legal 
and financial resources to implement a tuberculosis eradication program and to ensure the compliance 
with program provisions. 
 
5. The State must supervise boundarie s through the use of road check stations, inspection of livestock  
at concentration points, or by any other means deemed appropriate by the Chief State Animal Health  
Official, the AVIC, the DTE, and the Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist.  The State must also maintain 
clinical and epidemiological surveillance and carry out necessary diagnostic tests. 
 
 6. Suspected and/or confirmed tuberculosis cases mu st be reported to State or Federal animal health 
officials within 24 hours or by the next business day.  
 
 7. If bovine tuberculosis is diagnosed within any State or  zone in an animal not specifically covered by this 
UM&R or the UM&R for captive cervids and a risk assessment conducted by APHIS determines that the 
outbreak poses a tuberculosis risk to livestock within the State or zone, the State must implement a 
tuberculosis management plan, approved jointly by the Chief State Animal Health Official and the APHIS 
Administrator, within 6 months of the diagnosis.  The management plan must include provisions for 
immediate investigation of bovine tuberculosis in animals held for exhibition and in livestock and
Text Len: 1780
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
outbreak poses a tuberculosis risk to livestock within the State or zone, the State must implement a 
tuberculosis management plan, approved jointly by the Chief State Animal Health Official and the APHIS 
Administrator, within 6 months of the diagnosis.  The management plan must include provisions for 
immediate investigation of bovine tuberculosis in animals held for exhibition and in livestock and wildlife; 
the prevention of the spread of the disease to other animals held for exhibition and to livestock and 
wildlife; increased surveillance for tuberculosis in livestock, wildlife, and animals held for exhibition; 
eradication of tuberculosis from individual herds; provisions to reduce the prevalence of tuberculosis in 
wildlife; and a realistic timeline for the eradication of tuberculosis.  
 
The plan must also include surveillance of free-ranging cervids at a rate to determine the annual 
prevalence of tuberculosis in the cervid population within an area or zone that is not classified as 
Accredited-free.  Feeding and baiting of free-ranging cervids should be banned in any county in which  
M. bovis infection has been disclosed in livestock or wildlife.  Performance standards, as appropriate, 
must be implemented to measure yearly progress toward eradication.  If a State or zone does not 
implement such a plan within the required 6 months, the State or zone could lose its current status and 
could be reclassified to the next lower status. 
 
 8. If any livestock other than cattle or bison are incl uded in a newly assembled herd on a premises where a 
tuberculosis-affected herd has been depopulated, the State or zone must apply the herd test 
requirements contained in these rules (Part III, K.2).  Failure to do so will result in reclassification of the 
State or zone to the next lower
Text Len: 1820
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 than cattle or bison are incl uded in a newly assembled herd on a premises where a 
tuberculosis-affected herd has been depopulated, the State or zone must apply the herd test 
requirements contained in these rules (Part III, K.2).  Failure to do so will result in reclassification of the 
State or zone to the next lower State or zone classification. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     24 
B.  Surveillance 
 
 1. Routine surveillance of cattle and bison in States or zones:   
 
  a. Surveillance of cattle and bison in each State or  zone consists of slaughter inspection and tuberculin 
testing.  In each State or zone the total number of adult cattle and bison tested and/or inspected at 
slaughter should be sufficient to detect a 0.05 percent, or lower, prevalence level among that State’s, 
or zone’s cattle and bison with 95 percent confidence.  For States or zones with more than 60,000 
Text Len: 1043
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
testing.  In each State or zone the total number of adult cattle and bison tested and/or inspected at 
slaughter should be sufficient to detect a 0.05 percent, or lower, prevalence level among that State’s, 
or zone’s cattle and bison with 95 percent confidence.  For States or zones with more than 60,000 
adult cattle and bison, this standard requires that at least 6,000 adult cattle and bison are 
documented to have been inspected at slaughter, or tuberculin tested, each year. 
 
  b .  Validation of slaughter inspection:  All cattle slaughtered in U.S. slaughter plants for wholesale or 
retail purposes are inspected for evidence of tuberculosis by State Meat Inspection or FSIS 
personnel.  To validate that carcasses are carefully inspected, each slaughter plant should submit 
suspicious granulomatous lesion(s) from at least one animal in every 2000 adult cattle or bison 
slaughtered at the facility.  The State and/or Federal animal health officials of a State or zone must 
assess the granuloma submission rates of slaughter plants within the borders of their State or zone.  
Failure of one or more plants within a State or zone to meet this granuloma submission rate may 
compromise the effectiveness of tuberculosis surveillance and could jeopardize the tuberculosis 
status of that State or zone, as well as other States or zones, that export cattle and bison to these 
plants for slaughter. 
 
c. Monitoring tuberculin testing:  Each State must implement a system to monitor the response rate 
reported by each individual authorized to conduct official tuberculin tests.  A response rate of less 
than one responder for each progressive specified range of CFT tests conducted as outlined in 
Appendix C
Text Len: 1725
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 bison to these 
plants for slaughter. 
 
c. Monitoring tuberculin testing:  Each State must implement a system to monitor the response rate 
reported by each individual authorized to conduct official tuberculin tests.  A response rate of less 
than one responder for each progressive specified range of CFT tests conducted as outlined in 
Appendix C, after 300 animals have been tested, must be addressed and appropriate action taken 
and documented. 
 
  d. Monitoring slaughter surveillance:  The Chief Stat e Animal Health Official and/or AVIC of each State  
   must develop and implement a plan that ensures  that each plant slaughtering cattle and/or bison 
within the State submits suspicious granulomatous lesions for laboratory examination at a rate of one 
or more for every 2000 adult animals slaughtered; provides estimates of the number and origin of the 
various classes of cattle and/or bison slaughtered and reports such estimates to the appropriate State 
or Federal animal health officials on at least a quarterly basis.  The plan should provide for a 
minimum of one visit per calendar quarter to each slaughter plant by State and/or Federal animal 
health officials.  The purpose of the periodic plant visits is to monitor surveillance activities for 
tuberculosis and other program diseases and to provide assistance to the attending meat inspection 
personnel and to plant management in resolving any surveillance issues that may arise. 
 
   In States where a significant number or all of the adult slaughter cattle and bison are exported for 
slaughter in plants located in other States, the Chief State Animal Health Official and/or AVIC must 
include in their slaughter surveillance plans provisions for determining where such cattle and bison 
are generally being shipped.  The plans should provide for surveying and monitoring the auction 
markets, commission firms
Text Len: 1894
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 significant number or all of the adult slaughter cattle and bison are exported for 
slaughter in plants located in other States, the Chief State Animal Health Official and/or AVIC must 
include in their slaughter surveillance plans provisions for determining where such cattle and bison 
are generally being shipped.  The plans should provide for surveying and monitoring the auction 
markets, commission firms, and dealers within the State that handle adult slaughter cattle and bison 
to determine where such animals are routinely shipped for slaughter.  The Federal and State animal 
health officials of the States exporting adult cattle and bison for slaughter should establish a working 
agreement with the Federal and State animal health officials of the States receiving such animals to 
ensure that the adult cattle and bison received and slaughtered from the exporting State are 
adequately monitored for bovine tuberculosis. 
 
2. Trace testing: 
 
  a. All cattle and bison in herds of origin and ca ttle and bison otherwise associated with those showing 
evidence of tuberculosis at time of slaughter must be quarantined and tested. 
 
  b. The testing schedule of all reactor and suspect herds must be current. 
 
                                                                                                                                             
Text Len: 1369
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                        25
  c. All cattle considered to be exposed to M. bovis must be traced, quarantined, and handled as outlined 
in Part III, K.3.  Epidemiologic investigation of cattle identified as exposed must be completed within 
90 days of initiation of the investigation unless the timelines are extended by the DTE with the 
concurrence of the Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
 
d. Epidemiologic investigation of positive bovi ne TB cases detected in slaughter cattle must be 
completed within 90 calendar days of laboratory notification of positive PCR or bacteriological 
isolation of M. bovis unless the timeframes are extended by the DTE with the concurrence of the 
Regional Tuberculosis Epidemiologist. 
 
C. Annual and/or semiannual reporting 
 
1. Testing and slaughter surveillance—An annual repo rt, including a narrative, for each State or zone 
classified as Accredited-free or Modified Accredited Advanced, must be submitted, jointly, by the Chief 
State Animal Health Official and AVIC of each State or zone to VS between October 1 and November 30.  
Semiannual reports, including narratives, for each State or zone classified as Modified Accredited or 
Accreditation Preparatory, must be submitted, jointly, by the Chief State Animal Health Official and the 
AVIC
Text Len: 1376
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 must be submitted, jointly, by the Chief 
State Animal Health Official and AVIC of each State or zone to VS between October 1 and November 30.  
Semiannual reports, including narratives, for each State or zone classified as Modified Accredited or 
Accreditation Preparatory, must be submitted, jointly, by the Chief State Animal Health Official and the 
AVIC of each State or zone to VS between April 1 and May 31 and between October 1 and November 30.  
Each report must show the amount of testing and slaughter surveillance that has been conducted.  Such 
surveillance must be in conformance with Part V, B. of this UM&R.   
 
 2. Approval and maintenance of status for States or zones classified as Accredited-free or Modified 
Accredited Advanced requires a review and the approval of each annual report by the Administrator of 
APHIS.  Approval and maintenance of status for States or zones classified as Modified Accredited or 
Accreditation Preparatory requires a review of each semiannual report and the approval of each 
semiannual report by the Administrator of APHIS. 
 
D. Specific State or zone status plans 
 
 1. Accredited-free State or zone  
 
  a. Accredited-free States or zones have a herd prev alence of zero for bovine tuberculosis in cattle and 
bison. 
 
  b. If an outbreak of bovine tuberculosis is detected in a State or zone classified as Accredited-free, and 
the index herd is depopulated and an epidemiologic investigation is completed within 90 days of 
confirmation of infection in the index herd, and the depopulation(s) and the epidemiologic 
investigation(s) of affected herds subsequently identified that are associated with the index herd
Text Len: 1678
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 tuberculosis is detected in a State or zone classified as Accredited-free, and 
the index herd is depopulated and an epidemiologic investigation is completed within 90 days of 
confirmation of infection in the index herd, and the depopulation(s) and the epidemiologic 
investigation(s) of affected herds subsequently identified that are associated with the index herd are 
completed within an additional 120 days, and there is no evidence of the further spread of 
tuberculosis within the State or zone, then the State or zone may retain its Accredited-free status.  
The APHIS Administrator may extend the time limits to complete the depopulation and epidemiologic 
investigation of the index bovine tuberculosis-affected herd and/or the depopulation(s) and 
epidemiologic investigation(s) of affected herd(s) epidemiologically related to the index herd in 
specific cases where circumstances warrant such an extension. 
 
  c. If two or more affected herds are detected in an Accredited-free State or zone within a 48-month period,  
   the State or zone will be removed from the list of Accredited-free States or zones and will be reclassified  
   as Modified Accredited Advanced. 
 
 2. Modified Accredited Advanced State or zone  
 
  a. Modified Accredited Ad vanced States or zones must have had a bovine tuberculosis prevalence of 
less than 0.01 percent of the total number of cattle and bison herds in the State or zone for each of 
the most recent 2 years.  Except that:  The Administrator, upon review, may allow a State or zone 
with fewer than 30,000 herds to have up to 3 affected herds for each of the most recent 2 years, 
depending on
Text Len: 1654
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
less than 0.01 percent of the total number of cattle and bison herds in the State or zone for each of 
the most recent 2 years.  Except that:  The Administrator, upon review, may allow a State or zone 
with fewer than 30,000 herds to have up to 3 affected herds for each of the most recent 2 years, 
depending on the veterinary infrastructure, livestock demographics, and tuberculosis control and 
eradication measures in the State or zone. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     26 
 
 
  b. To qualify for Accredited-free status, a Modified Accredited Advanced State or zone must 
demonstrate to the Administrator that it complies with the provisions of these UM&R, has zero 
percent prevalence of affected cattle and bison herds, and has had no findings of tuberculosis in any 
cattle or bison in the State or zone for the previous 5 years.  Except that:   
 
   (1) The requirement of freedom from tuberculosis is 2 years from the release from quarantine of the 
last affected herd in States or zones
Text Len: 1135
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 zero 
percent prevalence of affected cattle and bison herds, and has had no findings of tuberculosis in any 
cattle or bison in the State or zone for the previous 5 years.  Except that:   
 
   (1) The requirement of freedom from tuberculosis is 2 years from the release from quarantine of the 
last affected herd in States or zones that were previously Accredited-free.  The State or zone 
must have conducted additional surveillance that demonstrates that other livestock herds and 
wildlife are not at risk of being infected with tuberculosis as determined by the Administrator 
based on a risk assessment conducted by APHIS.   
 
   (2) The requirement of freedom from tuberculosis can be less than 5 years in all other States or 
zones if the management of tuberculosis, including surveillance measures conducted in livestock 
and wildlife, exceeds the provisions of this UM&R as determined by APHIS and approved by the 
Administrator. 
 
 3. Modified Accredited State or zone  
 
  a. Modified Accredited States or zones must have had a tuberculosis prevalence of less than 0.1 
percent of the total number of cattle and bison herds in the State or zone for the most recent year.  
Except that:  The Administrator, upon review, may allow a State or zone with fewer than 10,000 herds 
to have up to 10 affected herds for the most recent year, depending on the veterinary infrastructure, 
livestock demographics, and tuberculosis control and eradication measures in the State or zone. 
 
  b. To qualify for Modified Accredited Advanced status, a Modified Accredited State or zone must 
demonstrate to the Administrator that it complies with the provisions of these UM&R and has had a 
tuberculosis prevalence of less than 0.01 percent of
Text Len: 1743
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

livestock demographics, and tuberculosis control and eradication measures in the State or zone. 
 
  b. To qualify for Modified Accredited Advanced status, a Modified Accredited State or zone must 
demonstrate to the Administrator that it complies with the provisions of these UM&R and has had a 
tuberculosis prevalence of less than 0.01 percent of the total number of cattle and bison herds in the 
State or zone for each of the most recent 2 years.  Except that:  The Administrator, upon review, may 
allow a State or zone with fewer than 30,000 herds to have up to 3 affected herds for each of the 
most recent 2 years, depending on the veterinary infrastructure, livestock demographics, and 
tuberculosis control and eradication measures in the State or zone. 
 
 4. Accreditation Preparatory State or zone  
 
  a. Accreditation Preparatory States or zones have a tuberculosis prevalence of less than 0.5 percent of 
the total number of cattle and bison herds in the State or zone. 
 
  b. To qualify for Modified Accredited status, an Accreditation Preparatory State or zone must 
demonstrate to the Administrator that it complies with the provisions of these UM&R and has had a 
tuberculosis prevalence of less than 0.1 percent of the total number of cattle and bison herds in the 
State or zone for the most recent year.  Except that:  the Administrator, upon review, may allow a 
State or zone with fewer than 10,000 herds to have up to 10 affected herds for the most recent year, 
depending on the veterinary infrastructure, livestock demographics, and tuberculosis control and 
eradication measures in the State or zone. 
 
 5. Nonaccredited State or zone  
 
  a
Text Len: 1676
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 the Administrator, upon review, may allow a 
State or zone with fewer than 10,000 herds to have up to 10 affected herds for the most recent year, 
depending on the veterinary infrastructure, livestock demographics, and tuberculosis control and 
eradication measures in the State or zone. 
 
 5. Nonaccredited State or zone  
 
  a. Nonaccredited States or zones have an unk nown tuberculosis-affected herd prevalence or a 
tuberculosis herd prevalence of 0.5 percent or greater. 
 
  b. To qualify for Accreditation Preparatory st atus, the State or zone must demonstrate to the 
   Administrator that it complies with the provisio ns of these UM&R and has a tuberculosis-affected herd 
   prevalence of less than 0.5 percent of the total number of cattle and bison herds in the State or zone. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     27
APPENDIX A  
 
TUBERCULOSIS TEST REQUIREMENTS FOR VARIOUS CLASSES OF CATTLE AND BISON NOT
Text Len: 1057
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               27
APPENDIX A  
 
TUBERCULOSIS TEST REQUIREMENTS FOR VARIOUS CLASSES OF CATTLE AND BISON NOT KNOWN  
TO BE AFFECTED WITH OR EXPOSED TO TUBERCULOSIS AND FROM NON-ACCREDITED HERDS,  
OTHER THAN COMMUTER HERDS, BEING MOVED INTERSTATE OR INTERZONE 
FOR BREEDING OR FEEDING PURPOSES 
 
Status of State or Zone Breeding Animals Sexually Intact Heifers for 
Feeding 
Steers and Spayed Heifers 
for Feeding 
 
Accredited Free 
 
No test required. 
 
No test required. 
 
No test required. 
Modified Accredited 
Advanced 
Negative test within 60 days of 
movement of all animals 18 
months of age and older that 
are included in the movement, 
or a negative test within 6 
months of the movement if 
such animals were included on 
a negative test of the herd of 
origin conducted within 6 
months of the movement. 
No test required if moved 
directly to an approved 
feedlot, or are moved 
through one approved 
livestock facility and then 
directly to an approved 
feedlot. 
No test required. 
Modified Accredited Negative test of the herd of 
origin (all animals 12 months 
of age and older) within 1 year 
of movement plus a negative 
test on the individual
Text Len: 1198
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
feedlot, or are moved 
through one approved 
livestock facility and then 
directly to an approved 
feedlot. 
No test required. 
Modified Accredited Negative test of the herd of 
origin (all animals 12 months 
of age and older) within 1 year 
of movement plus a negative 
test on the individual animals 
to be moved that are 2 months 
of age and older within 60 
days of the movement except 
that:  the second test is not 
required if the animals to be 
moved that are 2 months of 
age and older are moved 
within 60 days following the 
herd of origin herd test and 
were included on the herd of 
origin herd test. 
Negative test of all animals 
included in the movement 
that are 2 months of age and 
older within 60 days of the 
movement directly to an 
approved feedlot, or through 
one approved livestock 
facility and then directly to an 
approved feedlot. 
Negative test within 60 days 
of movement of all animals 
included in the movement 
that are 2 months of age and 
older. 
Accreditation Preparatory Movement for breeding 
purposes not permitted unless 
from an accredited herd.  (See 
Appendix B.)   
Negative test of the herd of 
origin (to include all animals 
regardless of age) within 1 
year of movement and an 
additional negative test on 
the individual animals to be 
moved within 60 days of the 
movement except that:  the 
additional test is not required 
if the animals are moved 
within 60 days of the herd of 
origin herd test and
Text Len: 1454
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 all animals 
regardless of age) within 1 
year of movement and an 
additional negative test on 
the individual animals to be 
moved within 60 days of the 
movement except that:  the 
additional test is not required 
if the animals are moved 
within 60 days of the herd of 
origin herd test and were 
included on the herd of origin 
herd test. 
 
Movement must be directly to 
an approved feedlot, or 
through one approved 
livestock facility and then 
directly to an approved 
feedlot. 
Negative test of the herd of 
origin (to include all animals 
regardless of age) within 1 
year of movement and an 
additional negative test on 
the individual animals to be 
moved within 60 days of the 
movement except that:  the 
additional test is not required 
if the animals are moved 
within 60 days of the herd of 
origin herd test and were 
included on the herd of origin 
herd test. 
Non-Accredited Movement for breeding 
purposes prohibited. 
Movement for feeding 
purposes prohibited. 
Movement for feeding 
purposes prohibited. 
 
                                                                                                           
Text Len: 1138
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                                          28 
APPENDIX B 
 
TUBERCULOSIS TEST REQUIREMENTS FOR VARIOUS CLASSES OF CATTLE AND BISON  
FROM ACCREDITED HERDS BEING MOVED INTERSTATE OR INTERZONE  
FOR BREEDING OR FEEDING PURPOSES 
 
 
Status of State or Zone Breeding Animals Sexually Intact Heifers 
for Feeding 
Steers and Spayed 
Heifers for Feeding 
 
Accredited-Free 
 
No test required. 
 
No test required. 
 
No test required. 
Modified Accredited 
Advanced 
No test required if 
accompanied by a 
certificate stating the 
accredited herd 
completed the testing 
necessary for 
accreditation with 
negative results within 2 
years of movement. 
Requirements the same 
as for breeding animals. 
Requirements the same 
as for breeding animals. 
Modified Accredited No test required if 
accompanied by a 
certificate stating the 
accredited herd 
completed the testing 
necessary for 
accreditation with
Text Len: 1000
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
accreditation with 
negative results within 2 
years of movement. 
Requirements the same 
as for breeding animals. 
Requirements the same 
as for breeding animals. 
Modified Accredited No test required if 
accompanied by a 
certificate stating the 
accredited herd 
completed the testing 
necessary for 
accreditation with 
negative results within 1 
year of movement. 
Requirements the same 
as for breeding animals. 
Requirements the same 
as for breeding animals. 
Accreditation 
Preparatory 
Negative test within 60 
days of movement and 
certificate stating 
accredited herd 
completed the testing 
necessary for 
accreditation with 
negative results within 1 
year of movement. 
Requirements the same 
as for breeding animals. 
Requirements the same 
as for breeding animals. 
Non-Accredited Movement for breeding 
purposes prohibited. 
Movement for feeding 
purposes prohibited. 
Movement for feeding 
purposes prohibited. 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                          
Text Len: 1091
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                           29
APPENDIX C 
 
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR CAUDAL FOLD TUBERCULIN TESTING 
 
Each individual authorized to conduct official CFT tests shall be in compliance with these standards for CFT 
testing if the number of CFT test responders reported is equal to, or greater than, the minimum number of CFT 
test responders expected for the specified maximum number of CFT tests conducted.  For example, if 5 
responders have been reported, then the total number of CFT tests conducted should be less than, or equal to, 
1050. 
 
The response rates of each individual authorized to conduct official CFT tests shall be calculated for the number 
of cattle or bison tested for each 1-year period.  Except that:  In the case of authorized individuals who test 300 or 
less cattle and bison in 1 year, the minimum response rates for the maximum number of CFT tests conducted 
shall be calculated on a cumulative basis from year to year. 
 
 
 
Number of CFT Tests 
 
Number of CFT Tests 
From Through 
Expected Minimum 
Number of CFT Test 
Responders  from through 
Expected Minimum 
Number of CFT Test 
Responders 
     0   300    0   3518 3634 26 
  301
Text Len: 1232
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of CFT Tests 
 
Number of CFT Tests 
From Through 
Expected Minimum 
Number of CFT Test 
Responders  from through 
Expected Minimum 
Number of CFT Test 
Responders 
     0   300    0   3518 3634 26 
  301   473    1 3635 3750 27 
  474   630     2 3751 3866 28 
  631   775     3 3867 3981 29 
  776   915     4 3982 4095 30 
  916 1050     5 4096 4209 31 
1051 1183     6 4210 4323 32 
1184 1315     7 4324 4437 33 
1316 1444    8 4438 4551 34 
1445 1570    9 4552 4665 35 
1571 1695   10 4666 4779 36 
1696 1820   11 4780 4893 37 
1821 1945   12 4894 5007 38 
1946 2070   13 5008 5121 39 
2071 2195   14 5122 5235 40 
2196 2320   15 5236 5349 41 
2321 2445   16 5350 5463 42 
2446 2570   17 5464 5577 43 
2571 2690   18 5578 5690 44 
2691 2810   19 5691 5802 45 
2811 2930   20 5803 5914 46 
2931 3048   21 5915 6026 47 
3049 3166
Text Len: 839
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
50 5463 42 
2446 2570   17 5464 5577 43 
2571 2690   18 5578 5690 44 
2691 2810   19 5691 5802 45 
2811 2930   20 5803 5914 46 
2931 3048   21 5915 6026 47 
3049 3166   22 6027 6138 48 
3167 3283   23 6139 6250 49 
3284 3400   24 6251 6362 50 
3401 3517   25 * * * 
 
The table above is constructed by assuming that at least 1 percent of non-affected cattle will be false positive on 
the CFT test.  For a given number of responders, the maximum allowable tests are calculated using the 
cumulative binomial distribution and determining the 5th percentile.  For example, 5 or fewer positive test results 
are expected to occur among less than 5 percent of Accredited Veterinarians who each test, 1050 head of cattle. 
 
*  To remain in compliance with these standards, if more than 6,362 CFT tests are conducted prior to the end of 1 
year, a minimum of 1 responder must be reported for each additional 110 CFT tests conducted during the 
remainder of the year. 
 
Text Len: 964
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
